Handbook of 
Good Dairy Husbandry Practices
BREEDS OF INDIGENOUS DAIRY CATTLE
 BULLS        
Gir 
Native tract: Junagadh, Rajkot, 
Bhavnagar and Amreli districts 
in Gujarat
    COWS
 Hariana
 Native tract: Rohtak, Hissar, 
Sonepat, Gurgaon, Jind and 
Jhajjar districts in Haryana
 Sahiwal
 Native tract: Ferozpur and 
Amritsar district of Punjab & Shri 
Ganganagar district of Rajasthan
 Rathi
 Native tract: Bikaner & 
Shri Ganganagar districts of 
Rajasthan
 Red Sindhi
 Native tract: In Pakistan, also 
found in Punjab, Haryana & 
Rajasthan & Uttarakhand
 Tharparkar
 Native tract: Jaisalmer, Barmer 
and Jodhpur districts in  
Rajasthan
 Kankrej
 Native tract: Kutch, Mehsana & 
Banaskantha districts of Gujarat
FOREWORD
  COWS
 Murrah
 Native tract: Hissar, Rohtak, 
Gurgaon and Jind districts of 
Haryana
 With an annual production of 18.77 crore metric tonnes during 2018-19, India continues to be 
ranked number one in the world in milk production since 1997. Dairying is the main source 
of livelihood for our milk producers, majority of them either landless or marginal farmers. For 
making dairying a profitable and, sustainable venture, it is important for the dairy farmer to 
adopt scientific practices that would lead to increased productivity at optimum costs. For this 
to happen, the farmer should be aware of the basic tenets of animal health, breeding and 
feeding.
 Jaffarabadi
 Native tract: Junagadh, 
Jamnagar, Rajkot, Bhavnagar, 
Porbandar & Amreli districts 
of Gujarat
 The National Dairy Plan-I (NDP-I) has been launched by the GoI with the aim to double 
milk production in the country by 2020. This would require focused efforts in the field of 
breeding, feeding and animal health, which would increase productivity and optimize costs. 
In breeding, coverage of artificial insemination (AI) needs to be increased using disease free 
semen from high genetic merit bulls. There is also an urgent need to optimize the utilization 
of feed resources in order to reduce the cost of milk production through balancing the ration 
of animals. More importantly, preventive measures to control occurrence of diseases need to 
be put in place, which is pivotal in harnessing the full production potential of the animal. 
Nili Ravi
 Native tract: Originally from 
Pakistan, found in bordering 
districts of Ferozpur and 
Amritsar in Punjab
 This handbook on scientific dairy practices has been designed keeping these requirements of 
the dairy farmers in mind. The handbook attempts to provide basic information on breeding, 
healthcare, management, nutrition, fodder production etc, based on existing and new 
technologies, along with illustrations. Such information is usually not available from a single 
source to the dairy farmer. 
Pandharpuri
 Native tract: Solapur, Sangli 
and Kolhapur  districts of 
Maharashtra
 We sincerely hope that the handbook would be useful to the dairy farmer.
PART I
 ANIMAL HEALTH AND BREEDING
 Animal health plays an important role in harnessing the expected production potential 
of dairy animals. A diseased animal cannot perform to the expected level. Timely 
intervention is therefore pivotal in reducing the economic losses due to diseases. 
Improvement of breeds is also the need of the hour and the farmer needs to be made 
aware of various aspects of breeding to be an active participant of breed improvement 
programmes. With this aim, the Part I of  this booklet is divided into XIV sections which 
are as under:
 Section I 
Section II 
Section III 
Section IV 
Section V 
Section VI 
Section VII 
General observation of an animal
 Buying and inducting a new animal
 Care of new born calf
 Diseases preventable by vaccination
 Other important diseases
 Tick and fly borne diseases
 Tick, Fly and worm control
 Section VIII Diseases that occur after calving
 Section IX 
Section X 
Section XI 
Section XII 
Diseases that occur due to faulty feeding
 Mastitis and diseases of teats
 Common poisoning conditions
 Common zoonotic diseases
 Section XIII Breeding and related activities
 Section XIV Traditional remedies for minor ailment
SECTION I
 GENERAL OBSERVATION OF AN ANIMAL
 General observation of certain parameters will 
guide you in assessing the health status of your 
animal which will in turn help you in seeking 
timely advice from a veterinarian.  
Timely intervention can prevent or drastically 
reduce the losses due to diseases or other 
conditions. This section has therefore the 
following chapters:
 A. Seven questions for a healthy animal.
 B. Observing basic health parameters.
 C. Body scoring


A. SEVEN QUESTIONS FOR A HEALTHY ANIMAL
 1. Does the animal react normally to its environment and in the herd or is it acting strangely? 
(Behaviour)
 2. Does it carry its head, ears, body and tail as usual? Does it walk normally? (Attitude)
 3. Is the animal in good condition and is it well muscled, neither too thin or too fat? (Condition)
 4. Does it eat, drink and ruminate properly?
 5. Does it urinate and defaecate normally?
 6. If a cow is in milk, is there a sudden drop in milk production?
 7. Any other abnormal signs?
 Consult a veterinarian in case any change is noticed
 B. OBSERVING BASIC HEALTH PARAMETERS
 • Breathing frequency - (Breathing in + breathing out) is 10-30 times per minute in normal 
adults and 30-50 times per minute in calves. Observed best from the animal’s right flank, 
seen from behind.
 • Rumination - Not less than 40 times per minute and 7-10 hours per day.
 • Rumen movement - Two to three per minute, can be felt by pressing lightly on the 
upper part of the left flank.
 • Appearance - A healthy animal has a shining, smooth and even coat as well as shiny horns 
and hoofs. Eyes should also be normal without discharge or tears and muzzle moist.
 • Fever - Usually accompanied by rapid breathing, shivering and occasionally diarrhoea. 
Ears, horns and legs are usually cold  to touch while body is too warm.
 If  any change is observed in the above parameters or fever seen, consult a veterinarian.
 Body condition scoring
 Scoring
 Vertebrae at 
middle of the 
back
 Rear view of 
the hook bone 
(cross-section)
 Side view of the 
line between hook 
and pin bones
 Cavity between tail 
head and pin bone 
(rear and side view)
 Interpretation
 Score 1 - 
Severe under-conditioning
 Score 2 - 
Frame obvious
 Score 3 - 
Frame and covering well
 Score 4 - 
Frame not very visible
 Score 5 - 
Severe over-conditioning
 Not in good health. 
Will not milk well or  
reproduce.
 Health may be OK. But 
milk production low and 
poor reproduction. 
High producing, but fat 
may not be enough for 
peak production.
 May have more metabolic 
problems at calving.
 Extremely fat and will 
have metabolic and 
breeding problems.
 Dry cows and calving cows should have a body condition score of 3.5 (See chapter on body scoring)
 Observe your animals closely to help diagnose diseases early

C. BODY SCORING
 • Body scoring is very important in assessing the health status of an animal.
 • A low score may indicate diseases or improper feeding while a high score may indicate a 
high probability of breeding and metabolic problems. 
BODY SCORE-1
 • Extremely thin. No fat in brisket or 
tail docks.
 • All skeletal structures are visible.
 • Dull hair
 Body score 1
 Body score 2
 Body score 3
 • May be diseased and survival 
during stress is doubtful
 BODY SCORE-2
 • Thin. Vertebrae, hips and pin bone 
prominent.
 • Some tissue cover around tail 
dock, hip bones and the flank.
 • Muscle tissue evident but not 
abundant, health may be OK.
 BODY SCORE-3
 • Ribcage only slightly visible.
 • Fat deposit behind shoulder 
obvious, ideal condition for calving.
 • Fat deposit in brisket area.
 Cattle with body score 1
 Cattle with body score 2
 • Hook and pin bone visible, but not 
prominent.
 BODY SCORE-4
 • Skeletal structure difficult to 
identify.
 • Obvious fat deposits behind 
shoulder and tail head.
 • Flat appearance to the top line.
 Body score 4
 Body score 5
 • Folds of fat starting to develop 
over ribs and thighs.
 BODY SCORE-5
 • Animal is obese, flat appearance 
dominates.
 • Brisket is heavy and bone 
structure not noticeable.
 • Tail head and hip bones completely 
buried in folds of fat.
 • Back is flat and completely 
covered by fat.
 • Mobility impaired by large fat 
deposits. 
Cattle with body score 3
 Cattle with body score 4 may have 
metabolic problems at calving.
 Cattle with body score 5 and above 
have high probability of metabolic and 
breeding problems.
 Body scoring would be a helpful yardstick to monitor health

SECTION II
 BUYING & INDUCTING A NEW ANIMAL
 Newly purchased animals are one of the major 
sources of infection and may introduce new 
diseases into your herd. Once you decide 
on what type of animals you want to rear 
based on your resources, purchasing healthy 
animals and implementing strict protocols for 
introduction into your herd is one of the most 
important components to prevent diseases 
occurring in your herd due to introduction of 
a newly purchased animal. Determining the 
age of the newly purchased animal will also 
be a helpful tool. This section consists of the 
following sections:
 A. Purchasing a new animal.
 B. Inducting a newly purchased animal into 
the herd.
 C. Determining the age of an animal

A. PURCHASING A NEW ANIMAL
 Breed
 y A decision on what breed one wants to keep depends on the resources available with 
the farmer and the suitability of the breed to the locale. A decision on the breed should 
be taken only after detailed discussions with your local veterinarian/Krishi Vigyan Kendras 
(KVKs)/Kisan Call Centres.
 Source
 y Known disease free farms (either govt or private ) where regular testing for diseases like TB, 
JD and brucellosis are done and positive animals removed would be ideal sources to procure 
your animals.
 y It is better to buy animals from the owners’ premises rather than from cattle markets/shanties 
since chances of the animal being exposed to diseases is high at these locations.
 General signs to observe for in healthy animals during purchase
 y Eyes: bright, clear and not runny (no discharge), crusty or bloodshot.
 y Nose: cool, moist muzzle, with frequent licking; breathing should be regular and not laboured; 
beware of discharge, coughing, wheezing or irregular breathing.
 y Coat: Glossy, clean and un-matted, free of ticks/lice, other parasites or eruptions.
 y Weight: Average weight for the breed; beware of emaciated or thin animals.
 y Attitude: Curious, alert and contented; beware of cattle that stand apart from the herd, that 
seem disinterested or that show signs of a bad temper. 
y Mobility: Walking should be easy and free of limps; beware of slow or uneven gaits or 
hunched positions when sitting; the animal should be able to rise from seated positions 
with ease.
 y Udder: Healthy; size isn’t necessarily an indicator of a good udder. It should sit forward with 
prominent milk veins, not sag and not be too meaty. Observe the cow when she walks, the 
udder should not show too much sideways movement. 
y Body score: This is an important indicator of the health of the animal. An animal in good 
health will have a  body score between 3-4. (See chapter on body scoring)
 y History:  It is important to have a record of the detailed history of the animal on number of 
calvings, recorded milk yield during previous lactation, any specific disease occurrence like 
mastitis, prolapse of uterus, ROP, dystocia, hypocalcaemia etc.
 y Age :  Though not directly related to health, the farmer should also ensure the age of the 
animal by referring to its dentition. ( See chapter on aging and dentition) 
Transportation of animals
 y All steps should be taken to avoid stress while transportation. Adequate water, space, 
feed, water and rest should be provided at regular intervals while transporting, since stress 
predisposes to various diseases. The flooring should be provided with some bedding material 
like paddy straw.
 Observe proper procedures while purchasing new animal


B. INDUCTING A NEWLY PURCHASED ANIMAL INTO THE HERD
 Quarantine (Isolating the animal)
 y The newly purchased animal should be kept in isolation without contact with the other 
animals atleast for 3 weeks. One should attend to the newly purchased animal only after 
attending the herd.
 y Avoid attending to your herd after contact with the newly purchased animal without a 
proper wash and cloth change.
 y Carry out routine deworming, fluke treatment (based on endemicity) and vaccination during 
the period of quarantine.
 y For lactating animals, milk the newly purchased animal separately and, only after milking all 
the other animals in the herd.
 y Always adopt an “all-in all-out” system, clean and disinfect the quarantine area before 
inducting another animal(s).
 Testing during quarantine
 The following tests should be performed while in quarantine.
 1. For in-milk animals, test for sub-clinical mastitis (SCM)– If found positive, they should be 
treated and retested till negative results are obtained. In case these animals do not become 
negative for SCM on subsequent tests, they are most probably chronically infected. 
2. Test for brucella
 3. Test for bovine TB (bTB)
 4. Test for Johne’s Disease (JD) 
The following regional laboratories may be contacted for further information:
 Note: An animal testing negative does not necessarily mean it is free from disease
 For Northern region
 1. Joint Director, Centre for Animal Disease 
Research and Diagnosis (CADRAD), 
Indian Veterinary Research Institute 
(IVRI), Izatnagar– 243122
 For Eastern region
 1. 
2.  
2. Joint Director and In-charge Northern 
Regional Disease Diagnostic Laboratory, 
Jallandhar, Punjab
 For Southern region
 Joint Director
 Eastern Regional Disease Diagnostic 
Laboratory, Kolkata-700 037
 Deputy Director
 North Eastern Regional Disease 
Diagnostic Laboratory 
Khanapura, Guwahati-781 022
 For Western region
 Joint Director
 Institute of Animal Health and Veterinary 
Biologicals
 Hebbal, Bangalore - 24
 Joint Director
 Western Regional Disease Diagnostic 
Laboratory
 Aundh, Pune-411 007
 y The local veterinarian should be contacted for taking samples for the test or testing the 
animals (bTB/JD) and for any other advise. Many State animal husbandry departments also 
do the tests in their laboratories.
 Proper quarantine will protect your herd from disease


C. DETERMINING AGE OF AN ANIMAL
 Determining age of the animal is important while purchasing a new animal since the information 
provided by the seller may not always be reliable.
 I. DETERMINING AGE BY DENTITION
 At birth to one month, two or more temporary incisor teeth are present. By first month all 8 
temporary incisors appear.
 The central pair of temporary incisors are replaced by 
permanent ones which attains full growth by 2 years (thin 
arrows).
 Dentition at 30 months
 Dentition after 30 months
 The third permanent incisor 
erupts at around 30 months 
of age (thick arrow)
 The fourth permanent incisors 
erupt after 30 months. 
The second pair of incisors is 
fully developed at 3 years.
 Dentition of a 3 year old cattle with 2 
pairs of fully developed incisors
 Dentition at 3 years
 Dentition by 4-5 years years
 Dentition by 6th year
 By the 4-5 years the animal 
has a full set of permanent 
incisors. (In buffaloes by 5-6 
years)
 By the sixth year, the central 
incisor 
shows wear and 
leveled top.
 Dentition of cattle aged around 4-5 years 
with 4 pairs of permanent incisors.
 The wearing progresses steadily after the sixth year and by the 
tenth year, all the incisors show significant wear and space in 
between them. 
Dentition by 10th year
 II. DETERMINING AGE BY HORN RINGS
 This is not a good guide and may give only a very rough idea. The first horn ring appears at 10
12 months. One ring is added approximately in a year. But at the fifth year, the first three rings 
may not be visible and after 8 years, none may be visible.

SECTION III
 CARE OF NEW BORN CALF
 A calf is tomorrow’s cow. From the health point 
of view, the life of a bovine is divided into two 
parts; the first 24 hours, and the rest. The first 
24 hours of life of a calf is so important that 
it has a strong bearing on the rest of its life. 
A calf not provided adequate care in the first 
24 hours may succumb to diseases or will 
always remain weak and an underperformer, 
even though it has good genetic potential 
and is provided a good environment. Another 
important reason for losing a calf is diarrhoea, 
the management of which is equally important 
till such time the cause is treated and cured. 
Keeping this in view, the following chapters 
are covered under this section:
 A. Care of new born calf
 B. Calf diarrhoea and its management


A. CARE OF NEW BORN CALF
 The golden hour: The first hour after calving is the most critical period in the entire life of 
a new born calf. 
Important points to remember:
 y Clean nostrils and mouth which helps the calf breathe 
better and help prevent future breathing problems.
 y Allow the mother to lick the calf clean which promotes 
circulation within the calf’s body and prepares the calf 
to stand up and walk. 
y Cut the navel cord at a distance of around 2 inches 
from the base with a clean instrument.
 y Dip the navel (a simple smearing will not serve the 
purpose) in 3.5% or higher tincture of iodine solution 
ensuring a minimum contact time of at least 30 seconds.
 y Tie the exposed end of the cord with a clean thread to 
close the opening.
 y Repeat navel dipping after 12 hours. A poorly maintained 
navel is the gateway to serious infections.       
y A new born calf should be given 2 litres of colostrum 
within the first 2 hours of birth and 1-2 litres (based on 
size) within 12 hours of birth.
 y Many calves do not nurse adequate amounts of 
colostrum from their dams within the first few hours of 
life, and thus they may not receive adequate immunity.
 y Feeding colostrum after 24 hours of birth may not help 
the calf to ward off infections.
 Licking stimulates the calf to stand up
 Dipping the navel in 7% Tr.iodine is very 
important in preventing navel infections
 y A calf must receive adequate colostrum to protect 
it from diseases for the first three months of its life. 
Colostrum is the calf’s “passport to life”.
 y Hand-feeding new-born calves is therefore 
recommended so that the farmer is sure about the 
amount of colostrum an individual calf receives.
 y De-worming should be done within 10-14 days of age  
subsequently on a monthly basis up to the 6th month.
 y When the animal is 3 months old, contact the veterinarian 
for vaccination.
 y Provide calf starter from 2-8 weeks for better growth 
and early maturity.
 Example of a simple calf starter (approx. percentages)
 Maize- 52 %; Oats - 20 %; Soya bean meal - 20 %; Molasses - 5 %; 
Salt - 0.5 %;  Minerals (Macro & Micro) - 1.5%; Vitamins  - 1%


B. CALF DIARRHOEA
 y Diarrhoea in calves can occur due to various reasons.
 y Calves with diarrhoea lose considerable amounts of water and electrolytes.
 y Diarrhoea and rapid loss of fluid and ions can cause the calf to die very quickly.
 MANAGEMENT OF CALF DIARRHOEA
 y Replace the lost water and electrolytes at the 
earliest - Feed 2-4 litres of electrolyte solution 
every day.
 y The electrolyte solution provided should be over 
and above the normal feeding.
 y Consult a veterinarian at the earliest to determine 
the cause of diarrhoea and to provide appropriate 
treatment.
 Home electrolyte solution formula
 (For 1 litre of warm water)
 Glucose * - 5 teaspoons
 Soda bi carb - 1 teaspoon
 Table salt - 1 teaspoon
 1 teaspoon=5 g (approx.)
 * Calves do not digest table sugar (sucrose) effectively and addition may worsen diarrhoea leading to 
more fluid and electrolyte lose. Glucose is hence preferred.
 ASSESSING LEVELS OF DEHYDRATION
 Dehydration level (%)
 Up to 5%
 5 – 6% 
Symptoms
 No symptoms, animal is normal.
 Diarrhoea, no clinical signs, strong suckling reflex.
 6 - 8%
 8-10%
 10-14%
 Mild depression, skin tenting* 2-6 seconds, still suckling, sunken 
eyes, weak.
 Depressed, laying down, eyes very sunken, dry gums, skin tenting 
more than 6 seconds.
 Cannot stand, cool extremities, skin remains tented, comatose.
 Over 14%
 Leads to death
 * The skin above the eye and around the chest and neck should rapidly snap back and return 
to normal when released. If the skin remains raised it is considered ‘tented’. The time taken to 
return to normalcy indicates the level of dehydration.
 Calves showing symptoms of above 8% dehydration require immediate intravenous fluid 
therapy, contact a veterinarian immediately.
 PREVENTION OF CALF DIARRHOEA
 y Ensure that adequate quantities of colostrum has been fed to the calf within 6 hours of birth 
to avoid failure of transfer of immunity. 
y Ensure that the calf is maintained in a hygienic and dry environment.
 y Ensure udder cleanliness before allowing the calf to suckle.

SECTION IV
 DISEASES PREVENTABLE BY VACCINATION
 Our country is endemic to many diseases that 
cause severe economic losses due to drastic 
reduction in the production capacity. Some of 
the diseases are even  highly fatal. Fortunately, 
vaccines are available for most of these diseases 
in our country and can be easily controlled if 
timely vaccination is carried out in a mass scale, 
covering a large proportion of the susceptible 
population (at least 80%). This section describes 
the following diseases that can be easily 
prevented by resorting to timely and regular 
vaccination:
 A. Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD)
 B. Haemorrhagic Septicaemia (HS)
 C. Black Quarter (BQ)
 D. Brucellosis 
E. Infectious Bovine Rhinotracheitis (IBR)
 F. Rabies
 G. Anthrax
 H. Theileriosis
 I. 
J. 
Vaccination schedules for cattle and buffalo
 Important points to be noted during 
vaccination
 K. Common reasons for vaccination failure


A. FOOT AND MOUTH DISEASE (FMD)
 y A highly contagious viral disease
 y Spreads through contact, contaminated water, feed and air. 
y Disease is rarely fatal for adults, however the milk production, fertility in females and draft 
power of males are severely impaired for life after recovery from disease. 
y Usually fatal in calves.
 y Also affects sheep, goat (usually sub-clinically and are maintenance hosts) and pigs,                      
which are amplification hosts (multiplies the virus around 3000 fold).
 SYMPTOMS
 Foot lesion
 Tongue lesion
 Dental pad lesion
 Udder lesion
 y Drastic drop in milk production and working capacity (draft animals).
 y Fever and serous nasal discharge and excessive salivation.
 y Vesicles may be seen on tongue, dental pad, lips, gums etc. 
y Vesicle in inter-digital cleft may lead to lameness.
 y Lesions on teat may lead to mastitis.
 y Loss in condition may persist even after recovery.
 PREVENTION
 y Get your animals aged 4 months and above vaccinated once in 6 months.
 y Infected animals should be immediately separated since all excretions and secretions from 
infected animals contain the virus. 
y All feed and fodder in contact with the infected animal should be destroyed.
 y All equipment used should be cleaned and disinfected with 4% sodium carbonate solution 
or as suggested by a veterinarian. 
y Healthy animals should not be handled by persons in contact with infected animals.
 y The infected premises should be disinfected with 4% sodium carbonate solution or with the 
disinfectant suggested by a veterinarian.
 y Vaccinating sheep, goat and pigs would control the disease to a better extend.
 y Informing authorities promptly would enable them initiate control measures at the earliest 
which will help in limiting the spread of the disease. 
MANAGEMENT OF FMD
 y Treatment is only symptomatic, the disease will run its course.
 y Emollients may be applied on lesions to soothe pain.
 y Contact veterinarian for suitable advice.
 Vaccinate your animals regularly against FMD to avoid economic losses

B. HAEMORRHAGIC SEPTICAEMIA (HS)
 y This is an acute bacterial disease of cattle and buffaloes which usually occurs during monsoon. 
y Mortality rate may be as high as 80 %. 
y Germs of this disease survive longer in humid and waterlogged conditions. 
SYMPTOMS 
y High temperature, sudden decrease in milk yield. 
y Salivation and serous nasal discharge. 
y Severe oedema of the throat region. 
y Difficultly in breathing , animal produces a 
grunting sound. 
y Animal usually dies within 1-2 days of showing 
symptoms. 
y Buffaloes are generally more susceptible than 
cattle. 
y Animals with clinical signs, particularly buffalo, 
rarely recover. 
y In endemic areas, most deaths seen in older 
calves and young adults.
 Severe throat and brisket oedema 
PREVENTION 
y Segregate the sick animal from healthy ones and avoid contamination of feed, fodder and 
water. 
y Avoid crowding especially during wet seasons. 
y Vaccinate all animals which are 6 months and above of age annually before the onset of 
monsoon in endemic areas. 
TREATMENT
 y Treatment is usually ineffective unless treated very early , that is during the stage when fever 
sets in. 
y Few animals survive once clinical signs develop. 
y Case fatality approaches 100% if treatment is not followed at the initial stage of infection.

C. BLACK QUARTER (BQ)
 y An acute disease of cattle characterized by emphysematous swelling usually in heavy 
muscles. 
y Buffaloes usually suffer from a milder form. 
y Contaminated pasture appears to be major source of infection. 
y Healthy animals in the age group 6 months to 2 years are generally affected.
 SYMPTOMS 
y Sudden high fever (107ºF-108ºF) and the 
animal stops eating and ruminating. 
y Characteristic hot and painful swelling 
develops on loin and buttocks causing 
lameness. Swelling sometimes affects 
shoulders, chest and neck also. When pressed, 
a crackling sound is heard because of the gas 
accumulation in the swellings. 
y Animal dies within 24-48 hrs of appearance 
of symptoms. At this juncture, swellings 
become cold and painless.
 PREVENTION 
Swelling on legs 
y Vaccinate all animals which are 6 months and above of age annually before the onset of 
monsoon in endemic areas. 
y Burning the upper layer of soil with straw to eliminate spores may be of help in endemic 
areas. 
y Sprinkle lime over carcass at the time of burial. 
TREATMENT 
y Treatment may be effective in initial stages of infection. However in most cases treatment is  
not worth the while


D. BRUCELLOSIS (CONTAGIOUS ABORTION)
 y An important bacterial disease of cattle and buffalo.
 y Leads to loss in milk production, loss of calf, birth of weak or diseased calf ,repeat breeding 
and even mastitis.
 y Humans may also get the disease from consumption of raw milk of infected animal or 
contact with uterine discharges. 
y The disease is very much prevalent in India, both in humans and animals.
 SYMPTOMS
 Joint swelling
 Abortion
 Retention of placenta
 y Abortion occurs typically after 5th month of pregnancy.
 y In an infected animal, chances of abortion reduces with number of calvings. 
y No abortions may be observed after 4th calving, but dam and calf remain infected.
 y Placental retention may lead to infection and even death of the animal.
 PREVENTION
 y Vaccinate female calves (not male calves) between 4-8 months of age.
 y Only one vaccination is required in its lifetime to protect it from brucellosis.
 y Any abortion from 5th month onwards should be suspected for brucellosis.
 y Ideally such animals should be culled. If culling is not possible, isolate the animal immediately 
for a minimum of 20 days after calving/abortion. 
y The aborted foetus, placenta, contaminated bedding, feed etc, should be buried (at least 
4 feet deep) after a liberal sprinkling of lime. These materials contain very high bacterial 
loads and if disposed improperly cause the spread of disease by contaminating food sources 
(pasture, feed, water etc).
 y Disinfect the shed after isolating the aborted animal.  
y When the animal is in isolation, disinfect the lochial discharges (which also contain high 
bacterial loads) daily  with 1-2% NaOH or 5% sodium hypochlorite (bleach) solution till the 
discharges cease (usually by 10 –15 days).
 y Do not handle infected material with bare hands since the disease is zoonotic.
 TREATMENT
 y There is no effective treatment once the animal is infected since the bacteria remains in the 
body of the animal. Consult a veterinarian in case of suspicion.
 y Disease in humans is curable provided proper treatment regimen is followed.
 Vaccinate 4-8 month old female calves once - protect them for life


E. INFECTIOUS BOVINE RHINOTRACHEITIS (IBR)
 y An important viral disease affecting domestic and wild cattle and buffaloes.
 y There are three forms : respiratory, genital and encephalitic, the first two are more common. 
There is a high prevalence of this disease in India.
 y Causes abortions, ROP, moderate reduction in milk production and even death in calves. 
Infection can be transmitted through semen.
 SYMPTOMS
 Salivation
 y Coughing, profuse bilateral serous 
discharge from nostrils and pyrexia. 
y Rhinitis, conjunctivitis (one or both 
eyes) with profuse ocular discharge. 
y In genital form, swollen vulva with 
papules which later become ulcers.
 y Abortion is common at 6-8 months 
of pregnancy.
 Genital form - Pustules  
on vulva
 y Uncomplicated cases of respiratory and genital forms usually resolves in 5-10 days. Infected 
animals may carry the virus throughout its lifetime.
 y The brain may be effected in calves below 6 months causing high mortality.
 Respiratory form - Red nose
 PREVENTION AND CONTROL
 y Purchase new animals only after testing them.
 y Induct only negative animals to your farm.
 y Vaccination is a method of prevention.
 y Consult a veterinarian immediately if the above symptoms 
are seen to prevent the disease from spreading.
 Respiratory form - Necrosis of  
mucous membrane
 Vaccination
 IBR is an emerging disease that needs to be controlled

F. RABIES
 y A highly fatal viral disease mainly transmitted by bite of a rabid dog. 
 y Humans can get the disease through bites of rabid dogs. 
 y Wild carnivores and bats also present a considerable risk where the disease is prev alent. The 
disease is endemic in India. 
Bellowing and salivation
 Paralytic form of rabies
 COMMON SYMPTOMS

 Hyperexcitability. 
 y Drooling of saliva 
 y Peculiar hoarse sound (bellowing) 
 y Aggression or paralysis 
 y The animal dies within 24-48 
hours after appearance of first 
sign, which may be mostly seen 
within 3 weeks or as late as 5-6 
months of the dog bite. Once 
symptoms are seen, death is 
inevitable. 
F. RABIES
 y A highly fatal viral disease mainly transmitted by bite of a rabid dog. 
 y Humans can get the disease through bites of rabid dogs. 
 y Wild carnivores and bats also present a considerable risk where the disease is prev alent. The 
disease is endemic in India. 
Bellowing and salivation
 Paralytic form of rabies
 COMMON SYMPTOMS 
PREVENTION 
 y Wash the wound immediately in 
running water for 5-10 minutes. 
 y Gently clean the wound with bath 
soap. 
 y Consult a veterinarian immediately. 
 y Carry out post-bite vaccination in 
suspected cases. (see chapter on 
vaccination) 
 y Protect your pet dogs and cats 
against the disease through annual 
vaccination.



G. ANTHRAX 
y A highly fatal bacterial disease affecting all farm animals. 
y Disease is characterized by high fever, respiratory distress, bleeding from orifices and sudden 
death. 
y Infection is due to ingestion of contaminated feed and fodder with spores of the bac teria, 
which can survive for up to 30 years in the soil. 
y Treatment is usually ineffective unless done at very early stages. 
y Humans get infection by eating infected raw meat, contact with infected animals or by 
inhalation of spores. 
PREVENTION 
y Regular annual vaccination of ani
mals in endemic areas will prevent 
the disease from occurring. 
y Vaccination may be carried out at 
least a month prior to expected 
disease occurrence in endemic 
areas. 
Sudden death
 Bleeding 
y Never open a carcass of an animal suspected to have died from Anthrax. 
y Contact a veterinarian immediately if the above symptoms are seen and seek advice on 
control measures to be adopted.
 H. THEILERIOSIS (a protozoan disease)
 y Young exotic and crossbred cattle are highly susceptible. 
Indian breeds of cattle (Zebu) are comparatively resistant. 
y Buffaloes are also infected but symptoms are mild.
 y Fever, swollen peripheral lymph nodes, pallour of 
mucous membranes, anaemia, nasal discharge, jaundice, 
salivation, rapid and shallow breathing , watery eyes etc 
are common symptoms.
 y Cattle lose condition rapidly.
 y Some animals show nervous signs characterized by stepping gait, head pressing, recumbency, 
unconsciousness and death.
 Swollen lymph node in a theileria 
infected calf.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Regular tick control is the most effective way to keep these infections in check (see chapter 
on tick control).
 y Seek veterinary treatment if above symptoms of any of the above diseases are seen, since 
treatment is most effective in the initial stages. Delays may result in death. 
y For control of theileriosis, vaccinate all exotic and crossbred animals aged 3 months and 
above, once in its lifetime


I. VACCINATION SCHEDULES FOR CATTLE AND BUFFALOES
 S.no Name of Disease
 1
 2
 3
 4
 5
 6
 7
 8
 Foot and Mouth 
Disease (FMD)
 Haemorrhagic 
Septicaemia (HS)
 Black Quarter (BQ)
 Brucellosis
 Theileriosis
 Anthrax
 IBR
 Age at first dose
 Booster dose
 4 months and above 1 month after 
first dose
 6 months and above
 6 months and above
 4-8 months of age 
(Only female calves)--
 Subsequent dose(s)
 Six monthly
 Annually in endemic areas.
 Annually in endemic areas.
3 months of age and 
above
 4 months and above--
 3 months and above 1 month after 
first dose
 Once in a lifetime
 Once in a lifetime. Only required 
for crossbred and exotic cattle. 
Annually in endemic areas.
 Six monthly (vaccine presently not 
produced in India)
 Rabies (Post bite 
therapy only)
 Immediately after 
suspected bite.
 4th day
 7,14, 28 and 90 (optional) days 
after first dose.
 J. IMPORTANT POINTS TO BE NOTED DURING VACCINATION
 y Animals should be in good health at the time of vaccination.
 y The cold chain of the vaccines wherever prescribed should be maintained till the time of 
administration to the animal.
 y The manufacturers’ instruction on the route and dosage should be strictly followed.
 y A minimum vaccination coverage of 80% of population is required for proper control of the 
disease.
 y It is beneficial to deworm the animals 2-3 weeks before vaccination is carried out for better 
immune response.
 y Vaccination should be carried out at least a month prior to the likely occurrence of the disease.
 y Vaccination of animals in advanced pregnancy may be avoided even though in most cases 
nothing untoward may happen. 
K. COMMON REASONS FOR VACCINATION FAILURE
 y Lack of maintenance of cold chain from the time of manufacture till vaccination.
 y Poor immune response in weak and improperly fed animals.
 y Lack of herd immunity due to only a few animals being vaccinated.
 y Poor quality of vaccine - Quality will deteriorate if repeatedly thawed and cooled.
 y Low efficiency or ineffective vaccine – May occur in case of strain variation (eg. FMD)



OTHER IMPORTANT DISEASES
 There are certain other diseases which 
cause severe economic losses but cannot be 
prevented by vaccination since there are no 
vaccines available . A few of these diseases are 
self limiting and proper care and treatment 
during infection may aid in recovery. 
Besides these,  there are some diseases which 
are incurable and the only option is to isolate 
and remove infected animals from the herd to 
prevent infection spreading to other animals.  
The clinical symptoms are seen only late in the 
disease and animals can spread the infection 
before exhibiting any symptoms. This section 
therefore deals with the following important 
conditions:
 A. Johne’s Disease (JD)
 B. Bovine Tuberculosis (bTB)
 C. Mycotoxicosis
 D. Ephemeral Fever (3 day sickness)
 E. Foot rot
 F. Dermatophytosis 
G. Dermatophilosis
 H. Lumpy Skin Disease



A. JOHNE’S DISEASE
 y An important bacterial disease of ruminants causing long-lasting diarrhoea with heavy 
economic losses. 
y Loss of weight despite good appetite. 
y Bottle jaw may also appear.
 y Once clinical signs appear the animal will not recover and will continue to deteriorate.
 PREVENTION AND CONTROL
 y Johne’s disease is not curable. 
y Positive animals should be culled from farm as it may 
infect other healthy animals.
 y Purchase new animals only after testing them.
 y Induct only negative animals to your farm.
 y Carry out regular testing of your animals.
 y Consult a veterinarian to test your animals for Johne’s 
disease.
 Loss of weight
 B. BOVINE TUBERCULOSIS (bTB)
 y It is also an important bacterial disease of cattle and buffalo.
 y The disease develops over a number of years and results in weakness, coughing and weight 
loss.
 y Also leads to anorexia, emaciation, difficulty in breathing, enlargement of lymph nodes and 
diarrhoea.
 y The disease is also transmissible to humans. 
PREVENTION AND CONTROL
 y Bovine Tuberculosis is also not curable. 
y Positive animals should be culled from farm as it may infect other healthy animals.
 y Purchase new animals only after testing them.
 y Induct only negative animals to your farm.
 y Carry out regular testing of your animals.
 y Consult a veterinarian to test your animals for bTB.



C. MYCOTOXICOSIS
 y Disease is caused by toxins produced by mold (fungus) that grows on feed (eg. ground 
nut cake, maize etc) and stored fodder (paddy straw etc) that is damp. Mainly result in 
Aflatoxicosis and Degnala disease in bovines. 
y The toxins can occur in concentrations high enough to cause major losses in health and 
performance of the animal.
 y The economic impact of reduced productivity is many times the impact caused by fatalities, 
milk production may drop by more than 15%.
 Mold growth on cattle feed stuffs
 COMMON SYMPTOMS
 Mold growth on paddy straw
 y Gradual loss of appetite and body condition, intermittent diarrhoea may be seen.
 y Alopecia, sloughing of extremities like tail and ear.
 y Gangrenous lesions on foot.
 y High producers may show symptoms first.
 y Reduction in feed consumption, reduced fertility, abortions, weight loss, increased occurrence 
of ketosis, Retention of Placenta (ROP), metritis, mastitis and other diseases due to lowered 
immunity.
 Gangrenous foot lesions and tail necrosis due to aflatoxins.
 PREVENTION
 y Avoid feeding dry fodder that is or has been damp and is obviously moldy and also avoid 
feeding feed ingredients with fungus.
 y Provide adequate mineral mixture supplements and green fodder.
 y Consult a veterinarian immediately on observing any of the above symptoms


D. EPHEMERAL FEVER (Three day sickness)
 y Ephemeral fever is viral disease of cattle and buffalo.
 y It is an insect-transmitted disease.
 y Persists usually for 3 days.
 y Morbidity may be very high but mortality is very low (1-2%).
 SYMPTOMS
 y Biphasic to polyphasic fever with shivering, tears from eyes and decreased appetite.
 y Nasal discharge, drooling, labored breathing, depression, stiffness, lameness and sudden 
decrease in milk yield.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Spontaneous recovery usually occurs within a few days.
 y Proper fly control would help to reduce the disease (See chapter on fly management).
 y Complete rest is the most effective treatment. Recovered animals should not be stressed or 
worked for some days since relapse may occur.
 y Consult a veterinarian for symptomatic treatment


E. FOOT ROT
 y Foot rot is a bacterial infection which is of great economic importance for dairying.
 y The incidence varies according to weather, season of year, grazing periods, housing system, 
type of flooring etc. 
y Stony ground, sharp gravel and pasturing on coarse stubble also predispose to the condition.
 SYMPTOMS
 Foot rot with lesion
 y
 Fever and anorexia.
 y Reduced milk yield.
 y Swelling of inter-digital space.
 y Foul smell from lesion.
 y Severe lameness -Animal holds 
leg in air to relieve pressure.
 y Hind feet are affected most 
often and cattle tend to stand and walk on their toes.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 Severe foot rot 
y Remove sources of injury and keep feet dry and clean. 
y Animals that are actively shedding infectious organisms should be isolated until signs of 
lameness have disappeared. 
y Steps should be taken to ensure that areas 
around drinking troughs, gateways, and tracks 
are adequately drained. 
y Preventive use of a footbath with an astringent 
and antiseptic solution eg. copper sulphate 
5% & zinc sulphate 10%, gives good results.
 y Systemic therapy is more important than 
topical treatment.
 y Prompt diagnosis and initiation of parenteral 
antimicrobial therapy are essential to achieve 
a satisfactory response. 
y If improvement is not evident within three 
to four days, it may mean the infection has 
invaded the deeper tissues. 
y Contact a veterinarian immediately on 
observing the above symptoms

F. Dermatophytosis
 y Fungal disease of keratin tissue (skin and hair).
 y Caused by a group of fungi called dermatophytes. 
y Direct contact is the most common method of transmission. 
y May be transmitted to humans. 
y Though lesions are unsightly, economic losses are minimal. 
y Lesions may cause some degree of discomfort or may lead to secondary bacterial infection.
 SYMPTOMS
 y Circular and slightly raised grey-white areas on skin called crusts. 
y Size of lesions are very variable and can become very extensive.
 Crust formation in dermatophytosis
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Usually recovers without treatment; however this can take many months. 
y Clean and disinfect premises regularly.  
y Reduce the density and direct contact between animals. 
y Increase exposure to sunlight.  
y Medicine to be applied topically after removing the crusts by scraping or brushing since 
medicine cannot penetrate the crust.  
y Crust should be collected and burned to avoid contamination of premises. 
y Consult a veterinarian for proper treatment


G.Dermatophilosis
 y The disease affecting the skin is caused by Dermatophilus congolensis, a type of bacteria. 
y Direct contact or biting insects may transmit the disease. 
y Prolonged wetting by rain, high humidity and temperature and, presence of ectoparasites 
are predisposing factors. 
y The organism can remain in a dormant form in the skin until the conditions are appropriate. 
y Can be transmitted to humans. 
SYMPTOMS
 y Lesions are characterized by dermatitis and scab formation. 
y Lesions can be observed in 3 stages (i) hairs matted together as paint-brush (ii) crust or 
scab formation as the initial lesions coalesce (iii) wart- like lesions due to accumulation of 
cutaneous keratinized material. 
y Most affected animals recover spontaneously within 3 weeks of initial infection.
 y Onset of dry weather hastens healing. 
y There is severe productivity loss in animals with extensive lesions.
 y Deaths may occur, especially in calves. 
Scab formation in dermatophilosis 
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Avoid damp conditions.
 y Proper ectoparasite control. 
y Hand-washing with an antibacterial soap after handling infected animals to avoid 
infection in humans.  
y Consult a veterinarian for proper treatment


H. Lumpy Skin Disease
 y It is a viral disease caused by a pox virus. 
y It is an emerging disease in India. 
y Biting insects and ticks may transmit the disease. 
y Direct contact does not play a major role in the transmission of the virus.  
SYMPTOMS
 y Fever and marked reduction in milk production.  
y Enlarged superficial lymph nodes. 
y Rhinitis, conjunctivitis and excessive salivation. 
y Cutaneous nodules of 2–5 cm diameter seen all over the body 
within 48 hours of onset of fever. 
y Nodules are circumscribed, firm, round and raised, and 
involve the skin, subcutaneous tissue and sometimes even the 
underlying muscles. 
y Large nodules may become necrotic and eventually fibrotic and 
persist for several months. 
y Small nodules may resolve spontaneously without 
consequences. 
y Myiasis of the nodules may occur. 
y Vesicles, erosions and ulcers may develop in the mucous 
membranes of the mouth and alimentary tract and in the 
trachea and lungs. 
y Pregnant cows may abort and may not come into heat for 
several months. 
y Bulls may become permanently or temporarily infertile. 
PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Ensure proper and tick and biting arthropod control.
 y Consult a veterinarian immediately if symptoms are 
observed.

 TICK AND FLY BORNE DISEASES
 Tick infestation is a major problem for dairy 
farmers. Many farmers find it difficult to control 
the problem. Ticks and biting flies cause a 
great amount of discomfort to the animal 
and also drain the animal of considerable 
amounts of blood, which in itself leads to 
a significant decrease in productivity. More 
importantly, they are also responsible for 
transmitting some diseases that destroy the 
blood cells. Infected animals, if not treated in 
time will succumb to the infection or remain 
chronically ill. It is therefore important to 
understand the symptoms of such diseases 
so that timely advice and treatment is sought 
from a veterinarian. The following chapters are 
covered under this section:
 A. Anaplasmosis
 B. Babesiosis
 C. Trypanosomiasis
 D. Theileriosis (Refer chapter H of section IV



TICK- BORNE INFECTIONS
 y Anaplasmosis, Babesiosis and Theileriosis (already covered under chapter H of  Section IV)  
are the three main tick-borne infections affecting blood.
 A. ANAPLASMOSIS
 y Anasplasmosis is caused by a small type of bacteria called rickettsia.
 y Anaplasmosis can also be spread by blood contaminated needles or AI gloves.
 y Calves are more resistant to anaplasmosis than older cattle.
 y Carriers exist in endemic areas which act as reservoirs of infection.
 y Chronically infected cattle may relapse in adulthood.
 y Fever, fall in milk production, progressive anaemia, jaundice, abortion are the common 
symptoms. 
y In later stages, inappetence, incoordinated movements, breathlessness when exerted, and a 
rapid pounding pulse are usually seen and animals may succumb. 
y The disease is curable if treated promptly in early stages.
 B. BABESIOSIS
 i
 ii
 iii
 iv
 y Babesiosis is caused by a type of 
microbe called protozoa.
 y Fever, inappetence, increased 
respiratory rate, sharp decrease in 
milk production, muscle tremors, 
anaemia, jaundice, abortion, 
constipation or diarrhoea are the 
common symptoms.
 y Curable if treated promptly.
 y In later stages, loss of weight 
with haemoglobinuria is seen. 
Nervous symptoms may also be 
seen. 
y It is better to repeat treatment if 
colour of urine does return to normal by 24 hours after treatment. 
y Babesiosis is not to be confused with “Red Water Disease” which is an acute highly fatal 
bacterial disease seen especially in areas with liver fluke infestation

TICK, FLY AND WORM CONTROL
 Both external (tick and flies) and internal 
parasites (worms) cause a marked reduction 
in the production potential of the animal. As 
already discussed in the previous section, ticks 
and flies also are responsible for transmitting 
certain diseases. Worms inside the body drain 
the animal of valuable nutrients. Infestations 
with worms lead to poor growth rate, diarrhoea, 
delayed maturity, weakness, increased 
susceptibility to infection, low response to 
vaccination and in severe cases, may lead 
to death. A little attention in controlling the 
external and internal parasites would go a long 
way in harnessing the production potential of 
the animal. This section therefore deals with 
the following chapters:
 1. Tick and fly control.
 2. Management of worm infestation


A. TICK AND FLY CONTROL
 y Ticks transmit diseases like anaplasmosis, theileriosis and babesiosis (see chapter on tick
borne diseases).
 y Biting flies transmit diseases like Surra and E fever (see respective chapters).
 y Heavy infestations may lead to anaemia and significant loss in productivity.
 y Tick and biting flies cause severe discomfort to the animal.
 y May cause allergic reactions at the biting sites.
 y They lay a large number of eggs resulting in further increase in population.
 Various types of ticks
 A tick with eggs
 Skin allergy due to tick bite
 I. TICK CONTROL
 Skin allergy due to fly bite
 y Any newly purchased animal should be completely de-ticked before allowing to mix with 
other animals.
 y Carry out periodic application of acaricide on the animal.
 y Each adult tick lays around 3000 eggs and the larvae can survive  from 2-7 months , based 
on the climate, without feeding.
 y All cracks and crevices in the cattle shed therefore should be sprayed with a higher 
concentration of the acaricide along with application on the body to avoid re-infestation. 
Flaming also can be done using a flame gun if available, with a little bit of caution.
 y The acaricide group should be changed often to avoid resistance from developing.
 y The acaricide should be applied in proper concentration.
 y Seek advice from a veterinarian on the appropriate acaricide and its dosage.
 II. FLY CONTROL
 y Proper manure and urine disposal on a regular basis. Disposal should be done at a reasonable 
distance from the cattle shed.
 y Any stagnation of drainage should be avoided.
 y Smoking the shed with raw leaves (neem leaf preferred) especially during evenings would 
help reduce the nuisance.
 y Fly repellants may be used in proper concentration.
 Natural repellants like neem oil etc, may be applied regularly to repel both biting flies and ticks. This 
does not have any harmful effects of chemicals and chances of resistance developing are also remote. 
Application should be always done against the direction of the hair and should cover the entire body, 
especially underbelly and legs.


MANAGEMENT OF WORM INFESTATION
 y Worms are parasites that usually live inside the digestive tract of the host, feeding on tissue 
fluids or blood of the animal. Worms may also be found in lungs, nasal passage, eye etc.
 y Eggs are passed through the faeces which contaminate pasture, feed or water sources. Some 
cause disease in humans also.
 y There are basically four types of worms : (i) Round worms and (ii) Tapeworms-found in the 
digestive tract; (iii) Flukes- found in the rumen and liver and (iv) Schistosomes – found inside 
blood vessels. (See figure below)
 y Different treatment regimens are required based on the type of the worm.
 SYMPTOMS OF WORM INFESTATION
 y Diarrheoa, delayed age at maturity, reduction in growth rate and milk production,  lower 
reproductive, draft  and feed conversion efficiencies, lower disease resistance, anaemia etc.
 y In amphistome (rumen and liver fluke) infestation, severe foetid diarrhoea and sub-mandibular 
oedema (bottle-jaw) may be seen.
 y Jaundice may be seen in liver fluke infestation.
 y In tapeworm infestation, pot-belly and moving small white segments in faeces maybe seen. 
It may also cause intestinal obstruction due to its length. 
 y Hookworm (type of round worm that sucks blood) and schistosome infestation may cause 
severe anaemia and bloody diarrhoea. 
 y Thick nasal discharge, snoring and shortness of breath may be seen in nasal schistosome 
infestation. Cough is seen in lungworm (type of round worm in lung) infestation.
 Deworm your animals regularly – Increase the productivity
 Different types of worms Weak animal Bottle-jaw
 i ii iii iv
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y First dewormer dose to calves to be given between 7-10 days of age and repeated monthly 
till 6 months of age.
 y Administer dewormer to all animals above 6 months of age twice a year, once at the 
beginning and another at the end of the rainy season. Ensure administration on the back of 
the tongue rather than into the mouth to avoid rumen bypass.
 y Adopt deworming on a mass scale to reduce the egg load of worms in the soil.
 y Pregnant animals should also be dewormed twice, 1st dose near its calving time and the  2nd 
dose around 6-7 weeks after calving.
 y If the animal is not responding to treatment, get the dung of the animal examined by a 
veterinarian to determine the type of worm and provide appropriate drug as advised.
 y In areas with snail population (water-logged etc), flukes and schistosomes may be suspected, 
since snails are involved in completion of its lifecycle.
 y To avoid drug resistance, do not administer the same drug repeatedly .
 y For any worm treatment to be effective, the drug must be provided in adequate dosage, 
consult a qualified person for proper advise.



DISEASES THAT OCCUR AFTER CALVING
 There is a huge increase in the requirement 
of 
nutrients and minerals in the body 
immediately after calving. Unless the body of 
the animal is conditioned properly through 
proper management and feeding during 
pregnancy, there is a high probability of such 
animals developing disease conditions due 
to such nutritional deficiencies which are 
collectively called “Metabolic Diseases” which 
leads to drastic decrease in milk production or 
even leads to death if timely treatment is not 
given. It would be important to identify the 
symptoms of such diseases so that prompt 
veterinary aid can be sought. The chapter 
describes the following disease conditions:
 A. Hypocalcaemia (Milk Fever)
 B. Hypomagnesaemia
 C. Ketosis
 D. Post-parturient haemoglobinuria
 E. Prolapse of Uterus
 F. Retention of Placenta
 G. Udder Oedema
 H. Fatty Liver Syndrome (Lipidosis



A. HYPOCALCAEMIA (MILK FEVER)
 y Occurs due to low calcium level in blood, there is actually no fever. May also cause dystocia, 
ROP and uterine prolapse.
 y Occurs usually within 72 hours of calving. Initial stage is excitability with fine tremors over 
flank and loins, ear twitching and head bobbing.
 y Complete milking during the first 48 hours of calving may precipitate milk fever in some cases.
 y The animal is unable to stand up and in later stages become recumbent, first with its neck 
turned to one side and then laterally. Eye reflex is also lost.
 y In last stage the animal becomes unconscious with sub-normal temperature.
 y Hypocalcaemia also exists in sub-clinical form with greater risk of the animals developing 
fever, metritis & ketosis. More losses are thought to occur from this form.
 VARIOUS STAGES IN MILK FEVER
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF MILK FEVER
 y Do not feed calcium supplements in excess during late pregnancy.
 y Chances of milk fever in prone animals is reduced greatly if given 3-4 doses of oral calcium 12
24 hours before calving to 48 hours post calving, with each dose providing 40-50 g of calcium.
 y Anionic salts like ammonium chloride and magnesium sulphate or ammonium sulphate (50
100 g each/day) may be fed during last 3 weeks before calving.
 y Contact veterinarian immediately if symptoms are seen, animals respond to therapy instantly. 
If left untreated, the animal will succumb. 
 y Some animals may relapse within 24-48 hours and require further treatment.
 y An animal should ideally have a urine pH between 6.5-7 near the time of calving. Higher pH 
indicates increased risk of milk fever.
 B. HYPOMAGNESAEMIA
 y Occurs due to low magnesium levels in blood, adult lactating animals are most susceptible. 
May occur in calves also.
 y Normal animal suddenly throws up its head, bellow, gallop and fall exhibiting severe paddling 
convulsions which are repeated in short intervals.
 y In milder cases animal walks stiffly, is hypersensitive to touch and sound, urinates frequently 
and may progress to convulsive stage after 2-3 days.
 y Often occurs along with hypocalcaemia. Untreated animals will die.
 y Soils fertilized with potash and nitrogen are high risk areas.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF HYPOMAGNESAEMIA
 y Provide Magnesium oxide @ around 50 g per day to animals at risk. 
 y Contact veterinarian immediately if symptoms are seen, animals respond to therapy instantly. 
May relapse after 1-2 days which require further treatment.
 Timely treatment will save your animal



C. KETOSIS
 y Occurs in lactating animals usually during the first 2 months of lactation.
 y Initially there is slight decrease in feed intake, drop in milk production, lethargy and firm 
mucous covered dung.
 y As disease progresses, there is marked weight loss, pica (animal seeks course materials), 
humped-back posture. Some even show frenzy and aggression.
 y Compulsive licking of mangers, bodies, head and nose pressing, chewing bellowing may 
occur.
 y Walking may be abnormal with staggering, circling and falling.
 y If untreated, milk production decreases to an insignificant amount.
 y Once a cow develops the condition, it is likely to recur in succeeding lactations.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF KETOSIS
 y Proper feeding during late lactation and dry period.
 y Body score at calving should be 3.5 on a 5 point 
scale.(see chapter on body scoring)
 y Sudden change of feed /overfeeding should be 
avoided.
 y Conditions like ROP, metritis, mastitis, environmental 
stress  etc should be managed properly.
 y Contact a veterinarian when above symptoms are 
seen.
 Weight loss in ketosis
 D. POST PARTURIENT HAEMOGLOBINURIA
 y Recent parturition, heavy milk production, 
phosphorous & copper deficiency, excess consumption 
of turnips, rape (Brassica species), sugar beet pulp etc, 
are considered as predisposing factors.
 y Symptoms are haemoglubinuria, marked drop in milk 
production, fever, diarrhoea, severe anaemia , weakness 
and pallour and sloughing of the extremities.
 y Diseases like babesiosis and theileriosis have to be 
ruled out.
 y Contact a veterinarian when above symptoms are 
seen.


 E. PROLAPSE OF UTERUS
 y More common in buffaloes than in cattle.
 y May have genetic predisposition and may occur pre or 
post partum.
 y Place the prolapsed mass gently over a clean surface and 
protect it from soiling /flies/birds etc. 
 y Do not attempt to remove anything or push the uterus 
back, this may cause severe bleeding.
 y Gently wash with saline solution if excessively soiled.
 y Call a veterinarian for further treatment at the earliest.
 y Prone animals may be kept with the hind quarter at a 
slight elevation.
 y Check the vulval area for any stitch marks before purchasing an animal.
 F. RETENTION OF PLACENTA (ROP)
 y Normally foetal membranes are expelled within 3 to 
8 hours after delivery.
 y It is termed as ROP if foetal membranes are not 
expelled even after 12 hours of parturition. 
 y Chances of ROP are  increased in cases of abortion, 
dystocia, milk fever, twin birth, induction of calving, 
infection and nutritional disturbances. 
 y Never pull the placenta on your own. 
 y Consult a veterinarian to avoid complications like 
metritis, septicaemia etc which may lead to even 
death of the animal. 
 y Dispose the removed placenta by deep burial. Avoid handling it with bare hands.
 G. UDDER OEDEMA
 y Accumulation of excess fluid in udder and sometimes in 
the belly around calving time.
 y Mainly due to increased blood flow to udder against 
decrease flow from udder and increased permeability of 
blood vessels in the udder.
 y More prevalent in high producing animals, especially heifers.
 y Udder is not  painful or hot and should not to be 
confused with clinical mastitis.
 y Predisposing factors may be genetic, nutritional, obesity, 
lack of exercise.
 y May become chronic and persist throughout lactation.
 y Veterinarian may be consulted if the oedema interferes with milking the animal


H. FATTY LIVER SYNDROME (LIPIDOSIS)
 y Fatty liver can develop within 24 hours of an animal going off feed. 
y This is typically  happens around calving time. Fat mobilisation occurs as a result of negative 
energy balance which is exacerbated when off feed. 
y The broken down fat is then converted back to fat in the liver thus the liver is filled with fat 
even when the cow is losing condition.
 y Once fat is deposited in the liver, its concentration in the liver does not fall until the cow 
gets into positive energy balance, which can be over ten weeks after calving, particularly if 
the fatty liver is severe. 
y Fat cows (Body Condition Score greater than 3.5) are much more prone to fatty liver. (Please 
see chapter on Body Condition Scoring)
 y It is an important economic disease especially in high yielders because cows that develop 
fatty liver are affected by multiple metabolic and infectious diseases.
 SYMPTOMS
 y Lower milk yields
 y Depressed appetite
 y Incidences of milk fever, ketosis, mastitis, retained fetal membranes etc
 y Reduced fertility
 y This condition can be detected by blood tests. 
y Mortality can be high. 
PREVENTION
 y There is no proven treatment for fatty liver. 
y Ensuring that cows are calving at the correct body 
condition would prevent the breakdown of fat and 
fatty liver. 
y An ideal body condition score to calve would be 
between 3 to 3.5 Cows should be dried of at this 
score and weight maintained through the dry 
period. 
y Changing diets during this period should be 
avoided.
 y Consult a veterinarian immediately if the above 
symptoms are seen.
 y Glucose supplements can be given to overfat animals as preventive measure. 
y Minimising stress is important for prevention of fatty liver. Sudden changes in environment 
should be avoided.


 DISEASES THAT OCCUR DUE TO FAULTY FEEDING
 The digestive system of cattle is highly complex 
with the stomach having four chambers. The 
digestive process is based on the action of 
various types of microbes which break down 
the feed and provide nutrients to the animal. 
Any sudden change in feeding pattern or an 
improper feeding regimen is bound to disturb 
the balance of the various types of microbes, 
leading to an over population of certain 
unfavourable microbes that may cause various 
problems like laminitis or even death in severe 
cases (acute acidosis). Such conditions may 
also arise from interference in the process 
of natural gas expulsion produced as a bye
product of microbial digestion. It is important 
to understand the common conditions so that 
timely advice or treatment can be sought from 
a veterinarian. The following conditions are 
described under this section:
 A. Bloat
 B. Rumen acidosis
 C. Sub-Acute Ruminal Acidosis (SARA)
 D. Laminitis

A. BLOAT
 y Bloat is a form of indigestion marked by excessive accumulation of gas in the rumen. 
y Bloat can occur when the animal grazes on lush young pasture, particularly if the pasture is 
wet. Some plants, e.g. clover, lucerne and alfalfa are especially dangerous in causing bloat 
but any fast growing plants can cause it.
 y Choking due to foreign objects (esophageal obstruction) will also cause bloat by preventing 
gas release and causing accumulation of gas in the rumen. 
y Sometimes feeding of leftover food such as dry bread can cause bloat.
 SYMPTOMS OF BLOAT
 y The left flank balloons out.
 y The animal kicks its belly or stands with its 
back legs wide apart. 
y It has difficulty in breathing.
 y In severe cases, death occurs due to 
asphyxiation.
 Bloating can be mild to fatal
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT
 y Avoid moving animals to wet pasture in the morning.
 y Do not allow very hungry animals to graze a pasture. Offer dry, cut grass first before 
turning out to graze.
 y Home remedies may be used in mild cases.
 y In severe cases, puncturing the left flank with a sharp knife to release the gas is necessary, 
it will be necessary for you to act quickly as any hesitation could lead to the death of 
the animal.
 Point for puncturing in the left flank
 Home remedies for adult animals
 y Drench coconut/vegetable /peanut oil: 
300-500ml once a day for 2-3 days till 
recovery. Or;
 y Above plus 30-40 ml turpentine oil. Or;
 y Drench 1 tablespoon of detergent in half 
litre of water once. Or;
 y Feed 4-6 banana leaves (mild bloat)


 B. RUMEN ACIDOSIS
 y Acidosis may be clinical or sub
clinical.
 y Feeding large quantities of rapidly 
digestible carbohydrate in a short 
period of time causes clinical 
acidosis.
 y In severe clinical cases, animals 
may be recumbent within 24-48 
hours, which may resemble cases 
of milk fever. Animal may not 
urinate or pass dung.
 y Sub-clinical acidosis is seen as 
a result of feeding increased 
concentrates compared to forage. 
 y In sub-clinical acidosis there is reduced feed intake, weight loss, unexplained diarrhoea and 
exhaustion. This may also lead to laminitis and lameness.
 y In severe clinical cases, prognosis may not be good. Some animals though appear to improve, 
may become seriously ill 3-4 days later.
 PREVENTION AND TREATMENT OF ACIDOSIS
 y Proper feeding practices should be adopted after consulting a veterinarian.
 y Animal should be provided a roughage diet in the mornings before feeding concentrates so 
that adequate quantities of saliva is produced.
 y Never provide the animal with large quantities of rapidly digestible carbohydrates.
 y A veterinarian must be consulted immediately in case of clinical acidosis.
 C. SUB-ACUTE RUMINAL ACIDOSIS (SARA)
 y Occurs due to excessive acid production(usually not lactate unlike acidosis) due to abrupt 
switch from high fibre diets to higher concentrate diets.
 y Major cause of reduced production efficiency.
 y Mainly due to improperly balanced or mixed rations, low fibre content or particle size.
 SYMPTOMS 
 y (i) Reduced feed intake (ii)reduced rumination (iii) mild diarrhoea (iv) foamy faeces (v) 
appearance of undigested >6mm particles in faeces (vi) depressed milk fat.
 y Secondary effects : (i) Laminitis (ii) weight loss (iii) poor body condition despite adequate 
energy intake.



D. LAMINITIS
 y Commonly seen in mature dairy cows during peak lactation, often a herd issue.
 y Higher concentrate/protein, low forage, mastitis, metritis , acidosis etc predispose.
 y Occurs in sub-clinical, acute and chronic form.
 y Rough irregular flooring , lack of enough lying space also predispose to the disease.
 Sole ulcer in sub-clinical 
laminitis
 Cross leg in acute 
laminitis 
Hoof deformity in chronic 
laminitis
 PREVENTION OF LAMINITIS
 y Provide soft flooring.
 y Provide balanced feed which includes sufficient forage.
 y Practice foot bath using  5% copper sulphate for 2-4 days 
continuously every fortnight.
 y Arrange for regular hoof trimming at least once in 6 months.
 y Adequate lying space should be provided to avoid excessive 
standing.
 y Check hoofs regularly for any injury and signs of laminitis




MASTITIS AND DISEASES OF TEATS
 Mastitis is a scourge that result in heavy losses 
to the dairy farmer by causing a reduction in 
milk production, drastic decrease or cessation of 
production, causing permanent damage to the 
udder or, even death of the animal in severe cases.
 Pure exotic breeds like HF, Jersey etc have the highest 
susceptibility to mastitis followed by crossbreds. The 
lower susceptibility of local breeds is basically due 
to its lower milk production and a better immunity 
levels. Buffaloes are the least susceptible to mastitis.
 With more farmers taking to crossbreeding for 
higher production, the prevalence of mastitis is also 
on the rise. Preventing the occurrence of mastitis 
would therefore play a pivotal role in making milk 
business profitable. A proper understanding of the 
mastitis will go a long way in reducing the incidence 
at the farmers’ homestead. 
Diseases of the teat may not lead to production losses 
directly, but indirectly there could be a decrease in 
yield due to difficulty in milking and pain caused by 
the lesions. This may also predispose the animal to 
mastitis. The following chapters are described here:
 A.  Clinical mastitis 
B.  Chronic mastitis 
E. Teat warts
 F. Ulcerative mammillitis
 C.  Sub-clinical mastitis G. Pseudocowpox
 D.  Mastitis in heifer


A. ACUTE MASTITIS
 It is the severe inflammation of udder where physical changes are clearly visible in udder 
and milk. High yielding animals are more prone. Mainly caused by bacteria (more than 100 
types). Also caused by fungi, virus & rarely by algae.
 MAJOR PRE-DISPOSING FACTORS
 Unclean animal/shed
 Faulty milking practices
 MAJOR SYMPTOMS
 Teat/ udder Injury
 Inflammed udder in clinical mastitis
 Physical changes of milk in clinical mastitis
 PREVENTION
 y Manage the pre-disposing factors of mastitis properly. 
y Before milking, clean the udder well with clean water and wipe dry with clean towel. Should 
use separate cloth towel for each animal. Disposable paper towel is also an option. Repeated 
use of unclean towel may itself predispose to mastitis.
 y Milking should be quick, complete and hygienic. 
y Milk animals with chronic mastitis in the end. (see chapter on this) 
y Carry out teat dipping or spray immediately after milking.
 y Prevent the animal from sitting for at least 30-45 minutes after milking.
 y Periodically check and treat for sub-clinical mastitis (see chapter on this).
 y Keep the floor of the cattle shed without holes and as dry as possible.
 y Continue teat dipping/spray 2 weeks after drying off and start the practice two weeks before 
calving.
 y Carry out proper fly control.
 TREATMENT
 y Contact a veterinarian immediately. Early treatment (within 2-3 hours) improves the chances 
of cure, delayed treatment may cause loss of udder or even death of animal. 
y Milk of animal suffering from mastitis should be discarded at least for 4 days after the 
treatment is over or as directed by the veterinarian.


B. CHRONIC MASTITIS
 y A persistent infection of udder.
 y Exists most of the time in the subclinical form.
 y Occasionally can develop into the clinical form before returning to the subclinical.
 y This results in hard lumps in the udder. 
MAJOR PRE-DISPOSING FACTORS
 y Neglected sub
clinical mastitis
 y Improper treatment 
protocol of acute 
mastitis 
 y Unhygienic shed


MAJOR SYMPTOMS
 The affected udder may 
atrophy or may lead 
to fibrosis leading to 
decreased or total loss 
of production in the 
affected quarter.
 Chances of recovery 
of chronically affected 
quarters are very low 
once atrophy/fibrosis 
has occurred.
 Unhygienic shed Improper treatment of mastitis
 B. CHRONIC MASTITIS
 y A persistent infection of udder.
 y Exists most of the time in the subclinical form.
 y Occasionally can develop into the clinical form before returning to the subclinical.
 y This results in hard lumps in the udder. 
MAJOR PRE-DISPOSING FACTORS
 y Neglected sub
clinical mastitis
 y Improper treatment 
protocol of acute 
mastitis 
 y Unhygienic shed
 Atrophy of quarters due to chronic mastitis Fibrosis and hardening 
of quarter due to chronic 
mastitis
 PREVENTION
 y Separate the affected cow from rest of the herd since they remain a source of infection for 
healthy animals. Milk chronically affected cows in the end.
 y Screen regularly for sub clinical mastitis and treat positive animals.
 y Shed hygiene is of prime importance.
 TREATMENT
 y Antimicrobial treatment is usually not effective.
 y It is better to dispose off such chronically affected animals.



C. SUB-CLINICAL MASTITIS (SCM)
 y Most prevalent form of mastitis - causes about 70% of the losses due to mastitis.
 y Causes heavy losses due to its prolonged effect throughout lactation. 
y The other forms of mastitis (clinical or chronic) develop from this stage.
 SYMPTOMS
 y No specific symptom seen except a  slight decrease in milk production.
 y Cannot be normally detected since there is no physical changes in udder or milk.
 DETECTION OF SCM
 California Mastitis Test
 Strip cup test
 y CMT - Equal quantities of milk and CMT reagent are mixed by rotating, SCM milk will form a 
gel. CMT reaction may disappear within 20 seconds , readings must therefore be taken fast. 
Also check each quarter separately.
 y CMT may give false positive reaction in very early (less than 10 days) lactation or when 
animal is almost dry.
 y Strip cup test - Small flakes are present in SCM milk when viewed against a black surface, 
size of flakes increase with the degree of SCM.
 y Paper test -  Green colour is indicative of SCM.
 y Field mastitis test - Can be carried out like CMT using using concentrated  detergent solution 
instead of CMT reagent.
 PREVENTION OF  SCM
 y All the points mentioned for prevention of ‘clinical mastitis’ are relevant here too.
 y Test for the occurrence of SCM in your animals at least once a week.
 y Each quarter should be separately tested.
 y Newly purchased animals should be tested first for SCM and treated if found positive before 
mixing them with the herd.
 y SCM positive animal (s) should always be milked at the end.
 y If animals are tethered in open, change places frequently.
 y Ideally, no lubricant should be used during milking. If used, it should be heated daily before use.
 TREATMENT
 y Consult a veterinarian for proper treatment.
 y The chances of curing SCM is much higher than a clinical or chronic case.
 y Timely treatment of SCM will also reduce the chances of clinical and chronic cases of mastitis


 D. MASTITIS IN HEIFERS
 y Traditionally heifers have been thought of as a group free of mastitis which is not true.
 y Routine visual and manual examination of the developing udder, mammary fluid and teat 
skin to identify swollen quarters and abnormal secretions (clots and flakes) help to detect 
heifer mastitis. 
 y Heifers with teat scabs and abrasions also are likely to be infected and should be treated 
with advice from a veterinarian.
 PREVENTION AND CONTROL
 y Calves should receive early, adequate colostrum intake and be removed from the dam as 
soon as possible.
 y If calves are grouped, they should be kept separate for at least one hour after feeding.
 y Watch for suckling of heifers: Remove any calf from a group that sucks on other calves.
 y Use fly control measures to minimize skin and teat fly strikes.
 y Pay attention to environmental conditions. Avoid wet, bacteria-laden areas for resting areas 
indoors and outdoors.
 y Maintain adequate nutrition without over-conditioning heifers. 
 y Mineral mixture should be fed in adequate quantities for boosting the udder immune system.
 y The critical time to prevent new infections is the last seven days before calving


DISEASES OF TEAT
 y Various conditions affect the teat causing difficulty in milking and some may even be 
transmitted to the milker’s hands.
 E. TEAT WARTS
 y Teat warts are caused by virus and heifers are more prone to infection.
 y Teat warts may appear as fleshy lumps or they may be of the feathery type. 
y Teat warts are generally more of 
an unsightly appearance issue 
rather than a serious physical 
problem. But may hamper milking.
 Feathery teat warts
 TREATMENT
 Fleshy teat warts
 y Treatment is not usually required, as most warts eventually regress spontaneously.
 y Surgical removal is possible but may lead to recurrence. 
y Removal should only be done on mature growths, since removing warts too soon can 
stimulate the growth and spread the virus. 
y Large pedunculated warts can be removed slowly by tying a ligature around the base. The 
wart will dry up and fall off within a month. 
y Consult a veterinarian for further advice on treatment.
 PREVENTION
 y Disinfection of stalls etc, can reduce transmission.
 y The virus is thought to be transmitted by flies, so fly control is also important. 
F. ULCERATIVE MAMMILLITIS
 y Ulcerative mammillitis is a relatively uncommon condition but it 
can spread rapidly in herds which are affected for the first time and 
cause significant pain and discomfort. 
y It tends to occur most commonly in first lactation cows.
 y It is also caused by a virus.
 y Lesions of mamillitis can spread over the entire udder and perineum.
 y Mouths of nursing calves might be affected. The clinical signs vary from 
small irregular fluid-filled blisters to larger areas of ulcers and scabs.
 TREATMENT
 Ulcerative mammillitis
 y No specific treatment is available.
 y Infected cows should be seperated from others.
 y Iodine dips may help disinfect teats to prevent the spread of the disease. 
y An emollient udder cream can speed healing of skin.
 PREVENTION
 y Difficult to eliminate once disease occurs in the farm.
 y Proper quarantine of newly purchased animals, good hygiene on farm and controlling biting 
f
 lies can significantly reduce the disease


G. PSEUDO COWPOX (MILKERS’ NODULE)
 y The most common infectious cause of teat disease in cattle. 
y Caused by a virus and not to be confused with cowpox, which is rare.
 y Since immunity is short-lived, cows can get infected fairly soon (often less than six months) 
after recovering from the disease.
 SYMPTOMS
 y Initial infection causes a small area of swelling and reddening on the teat.
 y Over the next two days, the affected area elevates into an orange papule, which then scabs 
over. 
y Seven to ten days after first signs the scabs start dropping off. This often leaves a horse-shoe 
or ring shaped area, which is very characteristic of pseudocowpox. 
y Affected areas may grow together leading to scabs covering the entire length of the teat. 
y Damaged teats are usually healed around a month after first signs. 
y Lesions of 
pseudocowpox is 
usually found on the 
teat. However  up to 
10% of affected cows 
may have lesions on the 
udder skin.
 y It can spread from 
cattle to man by 
contact. Skin infection 
in man is known as 
milker’s nodules, and 
is a painful localised 
infection.
 Pseudocowpox
 TREATMENT
 Scabs covering the teat in pseudocowpox
 y Removal of scabs  followed by  application of a suitable disinfectant .
 y Emollient teat dips and sprays  have a beneficial effect of reducing bacteria and viruses on 
teat skin.
 y Consult a veterinary doctor if above symptoms are seen.
 PREVENTION
 y Proper quarantine of newly purchased cows before introducing into the herd.
 y Proper teat dipping using iodophor is one of the most effective means of control.
 y Maintain proper hygiene in the shed.

 COMMON POISONING CONDITIONS
 There are a large number of plant and chemical 
agents that cause poisoning in animals. Some 
of them are fatal in nature if left untreated. 
A general awareness on the symptoms of 
common poisoning conditions would help 
the farmer in seeking timely treatment. The 
following conditions are described in this 
section:
 A. Gossypol poisoning
 B. Cyanide poisoning
 C. Organophosporous poisoning


A. GOSSYPOL POISONING
 y Occurs due to consumption of cottonseed or cottonseed products that contain excess free 
gossypol and can affect high-producing dairy cows with high feed intake.
 y Also affect other mature ruminants fed excess gossypol for long periods of time.
 SYMPTOMS
 y Irregular cycling in cows and buffaloes, reduced libido in males.
 y Weight loss, weakness, anorexia, and susceptibility to stress.
 y Adult dairy cattle may show weakness, depression, anorexia, edema of the brisket, and 
dyspnoea, and also have gastroenteritis, hemoglobinuria, and reproductive problems.
 CONTROL
 y Remove cottonseed products from the diet immediately. Severely affected animals may still 
die even 2 weeks after stopping feeding of cottonseed products. 
y Poor weight gains in affected livestock and increased susceptibility to stress may persist for 
several weeks after cottonseed products are removed from the diet. 
y A high-quality diet supplemented with lysine, methionine and fat-soluble vitamins should 
be included in supportive therapy.
 y Consult a veterinarian for further advise.
 B. CYANIDE POISONING
 y The most frequent cause of cyanide poisoning is ingestion of certain plants. These include 
arrow grass, velvet grass, young plants of Sorghum species, tapioca leaves etc.
 SYMPTOMS
 y Signs occur within 15-20 minutes to a few hours after animals consume toxic forage. 
y Excitement may be displayed initially, followed by rapid & difficult respiration, excess 
salivation. Mucous membranes are bright red but may become cyanotic later.
 y Animals stumble/struggle and collapse within an hour.
 PREVENTION & CONTROL
 y Avoid feeding grasses that cause poisoning until they are 15-18 inches tall. 
y Forage sorghums should be several feet tall before being used as fodder. 
y Animals should be turned out to new pasture later in the day only.
 y Grazing should be monitored closely during periods of environmental stress.
 y Immediate veterinary help must be sought if cyanide poisoning is suspected. 
y Treatment is very effective if given on time.


C. ORGANOPHOSPHOROUS (OP) POISONING
 y Pesticides are used on both plants and animals to control crop pests that and to control 
ticks on cattle. 
y A majority of pesticides are organophosphorous (OP) compounds which are active poisons.
 COMMON SYMPTOMS OF OP POISONING IN CATTLE & BUFFALO
 y Severe depression
 y Hypersalivation
 y Frequent urination
 y Diarrhoea, colic, and dyspnoea
 y Involuntary muscle contraction and relaxation which may be visible under the skin
 y Nervousness, ataxia, apprehension, and seizures
 y Pupillary constriction
 PREVENTION AND CONTROL
 y Animal should be fed adequate water before applying liquid/spray on the animal body to 
kill ticks.
 y The fodder sprayed with insecticides should be properly washed with water before feeding 
it to the animal.
 y Apply the pesticide as directed on the label at the recommended dose and time. 
y Do not treat sick, emaciated or convalescent animals, or animals under severe stress with 
pesticides for removing external parasites. 
y Generally, animals less than 3 months of age should not be treated for external parasites 
with pesticides. 
y Keep animals away from pesticide containers (new or used) or pesticide-contaminated feed. 
y Check the label for restrictions regarding application in conjunction with other pesticides or 
animal health products. 
y Contact a veterinarian immediately on observing the symptoms for timely treatment which 
could save the animal



COMMON ZOONOTIC DISEASES
 Zoonoses are diseases and infections that 
are naturally transmitted between vertebrate 
animals and humans. 
Zoonoses constitute 61% of all known 
infectious diseases. It may also be noted that 
out of the 175 diseases considered to be 
emerging, 75% are zoonotic. 
Poor hygiene, poverty, malnutrition, lack of 
education, close contact with animals are 
predisposing factors causing zoonotic diseases. 
There are some 45 zoonotic diseases 
purported to be transmitted from cattle. 
Dairy farmers who are in close contact with 
their animals are always at risk of acquiring 
infections from animals, especially since most 
of these diseases are prevalent in animals in 
our country. It is important that the farmer 
is aware of these diseases which could help 
him seek appropriate advice or treatment 
from a doctor. This section briefly describes 
the following zoonotic diseases that can be 
transmitted by cattle:
 A. Human Brucellosis
 B. Human Tuberculosis
 C. Leptospirosis
 D. Gastro-intestinal zoonotic diseases
 E. Tick borne zoonotic disease


A. HUMAN BRUCELLOSIS
 y Brucellosis is considered to be a significant public health problem in India. 
y Fewer than 10% of the human cases of brucellosis in India may be clinically recognized and 
treated or reported. 
y Most common symptoms are intermittent fever, joint pain and swelling , sweating, dizziness, 
headaches, chest and abdominal pain etc, though there are a wide range of symptoms that 
can be seen.
 y Humans get infection by drinking raw milk of infected animal or by contact with infected 
secretions through skin or mucous membranes, especially conjunctiva. (See chapter D in 
Section IV on Bovine Brucellosis)
 y Accidental injection with S 19 vaccine could also lead to infection.
 B. HUMAN TUBERCULOSIS
 y The disease in humans caused by bovine TB (bTB) (see Chapter B of Section V for bTB) and 
human TB bacteria are identical with respect to clinical symptoms and lesions and would 
require complex tests to distinguish them. 
y The importance of human TB bacterium as a reverse zoonosis (causing infection in animals) 
is also gaining prominence with reports humans and bovines respectively having mixed 
infections with both bTB and human TB organisms. 
y There may be no symptoms till the disease is quite advanced. The common symptoms are 
cough, loss of weight, poor appetite etc.
 y Humans get the infection by drinking contaminated milk from infected animals or by close 
contact with infected animals.
 C. LEPTOSPIROSIS
 y Cattle are one of the principal hosts for Leptospirosis. 
y Infection in humans is most likely to occur by contact with contaminated urine or uterine 
contents and by milking infected cattle. Infection rate is also higher in monsoon months. 
y The most common symptoms are fever, headache, nausea , vomiting, diarrhoea , jaundice , 
body rashes etc.



 D. GASTRO-INTESTINAL ZOONOTIC DISEASES
 y There are various zoonotic diseases affecting the intestinal tract. Some examples are  
infections with Salmonella, E.Coli, Campylobacter, Rota virus, Cryptosporidia and Giardia. 
 y The infection occurs through the faecal-oral route which is always a possible route of 
contamination in the rural environs where close contact with cattle is common.
 y The young, malnourished, immuno-compromised and pregnant women are usually more 
susceptible. 
 y The common symptoms in gastro-intestinal zoonotic diseases are fever, diarrhoea, loss of 
appetite , weight loss, dehydration etc.
 E. TICK BORNE ZOONOTIC DISEASES
 y Tick-borne infections have been reported from various regions of our country and are a 
group of zoonotic diseases that requires attention. 
 y They may be difficult to diagnose due to their non-specific signs and symptoms. 
 y The possibility of these infections being prevalent cannot be discounted with people living 
in close proximity with cattle (with moderate to high loads of ticks on them). Babesiosis, 
Rickettsial infections and Crimean Congo Haemorrhagic Fever (CCHF) are some of the 
examples of tick borne infections.


BREEDING AND RELATED ACTIVITIES
 Selective breeding of cattle and buffalo to increase 
milk production has been going on for a long 
time in our country and has made commendable 
progress in certain areas. Majority of the cattle 
and buffalo are still not included in the breed 
improvment programmes and that is why they 
are low milk producers. In order to increase the 
milk production in our country, there is a need to 
increase the production potential of non-descript 
local animals through scientific methods like 
crossbreeding. Along with this, improving the milk 
production potential of indigenous breeds in their 
native breeding tracts is also equally important. 
Progeny testing (PT) and Pedigree Selection (PS) 
coupled with Artificial Insemination (AI) and  milk 
recording have been identified as activities leading 
to steady genetic progress. For a profitable milk 
business, it is also necessary for the cow/buffalo to 
calve every 1 to 1.5 years. The following chapters 
would provide a good idea on the various aspects 
of breeding:
 A. Signs of heat, proper time of insemination.
 B. Advantages of artificial insemination (AI).
 C. Drying off a milking animal.
 D. Normal Calving and dystocia.
 E. Infertility and management of infertility
 F. A brief on Progeny Testing (PT)
 G. A Brief on Pedigree Selection (PS)



A. HEAT
 y Heat is a period in which female animal shows interest in other animals.
 y Generaly adult heifer/cow/buffalo comes in heat after every 21 days but may come in heat 
any time between 18/24 days.
 y This period may last from 6 to 30 hours.
 y To maximize productive life of a cow, it must be inseminated within 60- 90 days after calving. 
This will enable the cow to produce one calf per year.
 y Longer calving intervals have detrimental effects on lifetime milk production.
 y Heat detection is therefore  a critical component of good reproductive management.
 y Recording the dates of cows in heat and dates of services is necessary to predict future heat 
or calving dates and to manage the cows accordingly.
 SIGNS OF HEAT
 y Repeated bellowing. 
 y Lifting of tail. 
 y Swollen vulvar lips and redness of vaginal 
passage due to congestion. 
 y Thick, sticky and transparent vaginal discharge. 
 y Frequent urination (Micturition). 
 y Reduced feed intake and decreased milk yield. 
 y Restlessness, smells other animals and mounts 
on them. 
 y After 10-12 hours in heat, the animal allows a 
bull or a cow to mount on her. This is the right 
time for  carrying out AI.
 PROPER TIME OF INSEMINATION
 y Insemination (either natural service or by Artificial Insemination (AI) should be given ideally 
after 10-12 hours, or maximum of 18 hours of first sign of heat, that is, if heat is seen in the 
evening, inseminate in the following morning. If heat persists in the following morning, another 
AI may be required on the same evening.
 y If the animal does not become pregnant, it will come into heat after 18-21 days. 
 y After 21 days of insemination the animal should be observed for symptoms of heat, especially 
during early morning and late evening hours. 
 y Special care should be taken in case of buffaloes, as symptoms of heat are not very prominent


B. ADVANTAGES OF ARTIFICIAL INSEMINATION (AI)
 y Artificial Insemination (AI) is carried out by using Frozen Semen Doses (FSD) of High Genetic 
Merit (HGM), disease free bulls.
 y It prevents spread of sexually transmitted diseases.
 y During AI, diseases of reproductive organs are also diagnosed.
 y Through AI, semen from one bull can be used to inseminate many cows at a time.
 y When cow/buffalo comes in heat, the animal should be artificially inseminated with semen of 
HGM bull through trained AI Technician(AIT) instead carrying out natural service.
 y FSDs of HGM bulls may be used even after its death.
 y AI can be done at the farmers’ doorstep saving the farmer time.
 y There is speedy improvement in the breed of the animal.
 y AI is easy and cheap.
 AI being done by a trained technician at the farmer’s doorstep.
 POST AI MONITORING
 y 21 days After AI, the animal should be observed for symptoms of heat.
 y 60 days after AI, the animal should be examined for pregnancy.
 y If the animal does not conceive even after three inseminations, consult the veterinary doctor. 
(refer chapter on infertility)
 AI is a simple and cost effective method to improve milk production

C. DRYING-OFF AN ANIMAL
 The dry period is the most important phase of a dairy cow’s lactation cycle. For optimal animal 
health and best performance in the next lactation, lactating animals should have an opportunity 
to rest and regenerate mammary tissue between lactations. During this phase, the cow and her 
udder prepares for the next lactation; hence any abnormalities during the dry period will have 
a negative effect on the cow’s health and milk production after calving.
 Due to the good amount of milk they produce, the drying-off process is often more complicated 
for dairy animals. Preparation for dry off should begin at least two weeks prior to the dry-off 
date with a significant change in the animal’s diet. Reducing the energy content of the diet and 
feeding primarily a high-fiber diet will reduce the nutrients available for the animal to make 
milk; this is often all that is needed to reduce milk production to a level that makes dry off safe 
and simple.
 Length of Dry Period
 Animals should be dry for around 60 days. If animals have prolonged dry periods, they run the 
risk of becoming obese, experiencing obesity-related diseases and having difficulty in calving.
 Procedure for drying off
 Reduce concentrate feeding on a tapering basis 2-3 weeks 
before drying-off
 Stop concentrate feeding 1-2 weeks before drying-off
 Restrict feed intake if milk yield is above 12 litres per day
 Reduce dry matter allowance to maintenance levels 3 days 
before planned dry-off
 Stop milking abruptly.
 Do not restrict water access
 Check dry cows visually on a daily basis after drying-off
 Ideally, cows should be kept at pasture on a maintenance diet for a week after drying-off



D. NORMAL CALVING & DYSTOCIA
 y Calving usually takes place normally without help.
 y A sticky vaginal discharge is usually seen a day before calving.
 y In older cows the calf is usually delivered 30-50 minutes after the water bag bursts, but may 
extend up to 2 hours.
 y In heifers calving may take up to 4 hours after the water bag bursts.
 y If calving does not occur within the prescribed time after the water bag bursts, it is known 
as dystocia. In this case, it may be required to call a veterinarian. 
y If the head and two front 
legs appear after the water 
bag breaks, there is no need 
to call a vet and calving 
usually occurs normally.
 y A gentle traction of the 
calf in a downward arc 
by holding the front legs 
may be done in the above 
situation.
 In normal calving, the head and both the 
front legs of the calf will appear.
 Improper positioning of the calf 
during delivery causes dystocia.
 y Never attempt to pull the calf in any other position other than the one in which both front 
legs and head are visible (Not even if one front leg and head is visible).
 y In case an abnormal presentation is seen or nothing appears after the water bag bursts, call 
a veterinarian immediately.
 y Delay in attending will further complicate the situation. 
POST CALVING MONITORING
 y Under normal circumstances, an animal should come into heat within 45 days of delivery.
 y It is recommended to breed the animal in the subsequent oestrus after the first heat or 
within 60-90 days.
 y If the animal does not come into heat within a period of 60 days post calving, consult a 
veterinarian.


E. INFERTILITY
 y Infertility is a temporary disturbance in reproductive function wherein the animal cannot 
become pregnant. Normally an animal with a healthy reproductive function should calve 
every 12-14 months.
 y Infertility causes economic losses to the farmers due to delay in maturity, calving and milk 
production. The farmer also incurs losses by maintaining an unproductive animal.
 y Infertility may be due to various reasons like: (i) Diseases of genital organs (ii) Infectious 
diseases (iii) Absence of heat, repeat breeding, silent heat, cystic ovary (iv) Anatomical causes 
(v) Faulty AI technique.
 MANAGEMENT OF INFERTILITY
 y Inseminate at appropriate time of the heat. (See chapter on heat detection)
 y Repeat AI may be required in cases of prolonged heat for conception to occur.
 y Close observation is required to detect silent heat, especially in buffaloes.
 y Provide proper nutrition right from birth of the animal.
 y Provide adequate quantities of mineral mixture right from birth of the animal.
 y During summer season, reduce heat stress on the animal by providing clean drinking water 
at all times and adequate shade or cooling systems.
 y Ascertain whether the personnel providing AI services is adequately qualified.  
 y Consult a veterinarian if a regularly cycling animal has not conceived even after 3  
inseminations to identify the problem. Repeated inseminations may cause permanent 
damage to the reproductive organs.
 y Animals with anatomical conditions may not conceive.
 y Infection/diseases of reproductive tract also may lead to infertility. Consult a veterinarian for 
proper advice and treatment.
 FACTORS RESPONSIBLE FOR CONCEPTION DURING A NORMAL HEAT CYCLE
 Manage infertility-ensure conception
 y Only timely heat detection is in the hands of the farmer.
 y Proper handling of semen, proper time of insemination, proper AI technique and site of 
deposition of semen are in the hands of trained personnel (vets or AI technicians).
 y It is therefore very important to ensure that AI is being done only by trained personnel 
to avoid complications or problems later on. 
 y A healthy cross bred heifer should come into heat by 18 months or earlier.
 y Buffaloes and local breeds may take more time to mature ( around 24 months).



F. A BRIEF ON PROGENY TESTING (PT)
 PT is a scientific technique used to improve the milk production of any particular breed 
through selective breeding.
 STEP 1: Best yielding cows (elite cows) in identified areas for the breed are identified and 
inseminated with semen from the best bulls available.
 Elite cows of the particular breed
 STEP 2: Male calves born to the 
elite cows are purchased from 
the farmer after testing the dam 
and calf for certain diseases 
with negative results.
 X
 Best bulls for the particular breed
 Selected male calves
 STEP 4:The semen from these 
selected bulls (test bulls) 
are then used on a larger 
population of cows of the same 
breed in the PT area.
 X
 Test 
Bull
 STEP 6: Based on daughters’ 
performance, “breeding value” 
of each of the test bulls are 
estimated. The top 10% of 
daughters are also selected 
based on lactation records.
 Daughters of test bulls
 STEP 3:The selected male 
calves then undergo a series 
of rigorous tests at various 
stages (pre-quarantine, 
quarantine & rearing stations) 
before moving to the semen 
stations. Selected male calves 
should test negative for all 
the tests done at all stages.
 STEP 5:The milk yield of the 
daughters born to test bulls 
are recorded. A minimum 
complete first lactation 
records of 100 daughters are 
required per test bull.
 STEP 7: The top 10% of daughters (based on 
lactation records) and the top 10% of bulls selected 
(based on breeding value) are used to produce the 
next generation of young bulls. Each cycle takes 6-7 
years to complete. It is always ensured that there is 
no inbreeding in the process.
 Milk recording
 An Holstein Friesia



G. A BRIEF ON PEDIGREE SELECTION (PS)
 In Pedigree Selection, bulls are evaluated solely on the basis of their dam & sire’s dam’s milk 
yield. This process is followed when a large number of animals of a breed are available in the 
native tract but, either there is no infrastructure to provide AI or, the availability is scarce.
 STEP 1: Identification of villages having best animals of the selected 
indigenous breed in its native tract.
 STEP 2: Artificial Insemination (AI) network is started in the selected villages. Extension activities like 
farmer education, fertility camps and calf rallies are carried out in selected villages with emphasis 
on promoting AI.
 STEP 3: Selected cows or buffaloes of the indigenous breed are 
milk recorded and elite animals on the basis of milk production 
are identified.
 STEP 4: The elite animals giving maximum amount of milk is 
artificially inseminated with the best bull of the same breed 
available in the country. This is call nominated mating.
 STEP 5: Male calves born to the elite cows are purchased from 
the farmer after testing the dam and calf for certain infectious 
diseases with negative results.
 X
 X
 Best bulls
 Male calves
 STEP 6: The selected male calves then undergo a series of rigorous tests at various stages (pre
quarantine, quarantine & rearing stations) before moving to the semen stations. Selected male 
calves should test negative for all the tests done at all stages.
 STEP 7: Semen from these bulls are then used on a larger 
population of the same breed for faster genetic improvement
 TRADITIONAL REMEDIES FOR MINOR AILMENTS
 Traditional remedies  have been used for ages by the farmers to manage minor 
ailments in their livestock. The knowledge of some alternative form of medicine that 
could manage minor ailments till such time veterinary aid is sought is important to 
the farmer especially in areas where services may not be readily available. 
Many of these remedies documented by various agencies like BAIF, some milk 
unions in south Karnataka, International Institute of Rural Reconstruction (IIRR), 
Vivekananda Kendra etc, have been mentioned here. However it is important to note 
that the remedies mentioned here are only suggestive in nature and may not ensure 
a cure. The underlying cause of these ailments may be a disease which needs to 
be investigated to cure the same. Veterinary advice therefore need to be sought at 
the earliest. Illustrations of the plants are also provided for easier recognition. Some 
remedies and preparations for the following ailments are suggested:
 
 ANIMAL NUTRITION & MANAGEMENT
 Providing balanced nutrition is the foundation for productive and profitable 
animal husbandry. Without adequate nutrition, animals cannot express 
their full genetic potential nor will they be productively efficient. Low milk 
production, low reproductive rates, poor growth and increased illness may 
be the result of imbalance or deficiency of nutrients. Proper balance of 
protein, energy, vitamins and  minerals are needed in the ration of animals 
to ensure best performance with respect to production, reproduction and 
health. Therefore, providing nutritionally balanced ration to the animal is  
necessary to gain economic returns from dairying. 
The following sections are included in this part:
 Section I 
: 
Feeding of Animals
 Section II 
Section III 
: 
: 
Fodder Production 
Housing of Animals


 FEEDING OF ANIMALS
 Feeding is an important aspect of dairying 
as it accounts for around 70% of total cost 
of milk production. Different types of dietary 
feed ingredients for dairy cows and buffaloes 
include concentrates such as compound cattle 
feed,  oil cakes, grains and grain byproducts 
like brans and chunnies; cultivated green 
fodders and grasses; crop residues like straws 
and stovers. Following chapters are included 
in this section:
 A. Feeding of dairy animals.
 B. Importance of Ration Balancing Programme.
 C. Importance of compound cattle feed in 
milk production.
 D. Importance of bypass protein feed.
 E. Importance of feeding mineral mixture.
 F. Urea Molasses Mineral Block (UMMB)– A 
feed Supplement
 G. Importance of drinking water for dairy 
animals.
 H. Care of pregnant animals.
 I. 
J. 
Nutritional care after calving.
 Examples of preparing Total Mixed Ration 
(TMR) for cow.
 K. Examples of preparing Total Mixed Ration 
(TMR) for buffalo


A. FEEDING OF DAIRY ANIMALS
 y A normal adult animal should be fed 4 to 6 Kg dry and 15-20 Kg green fodder per day.
 y Legume and non-legume green fodder should be fed in 1:3 proportion. 
y Green fodder should be harvested at 50% flowering stage. 
y Surplus green fodder should be conserved in the form of  ‘hay’ or ‘silage’ .  
y Conserved fodder becomes useful during summers or when green fodder is scarce.
 Leguminous fodder
 Non-leguminous fodder
 GENERAL RECOMMENDATIONS
 Cattle feed
 y To optimize milk production and to meet the nutrient requirement of animals, balanced 
feeding using user-friendly software developed by NDDB may be adopted.
 y Animals fed only on dry fodder may be provided Urea Molasses Mineral Block as a supplement 
to the diet, depending upon its availability .
 y For body maintenance and higher efficiency of milk production, ‘compound cattle feed’ / ‘bypass 
protein feed’ should also be given .
 y Minerals are essential for all metabolic functions of the 
body, animals’ ration should be supplemented with area 
specific mineral mixture .
 y Changing from one feed to another should not be sudden 
but in a gradual manner.
 y Fodder should be chaffed before feeding, to avoid wastage  
and increase digestibility.
 y Various feed ingredients including the additives, should 
be mixed to make Sani or total mixed ration (TMR). It 
would be more appropriate to feed this ration in 3-4 
equally divided parts in a day. This would reduce spoilage 
and increase the digestibility.


B. IMPORTANCE OF RATION BALANCING PROGRAMME
 y The feed given to animals usually comprises one or two locally available concentrate feed 
ingredients, grasses and crop residues. 
 y This leads to imbalanced feeding which means that proteins, energy, minerals and vitamins 
in the ration are either more, or less. 
 y While imbalanced feeding adversely affects the health and productivity of animals in various 
ways, it also reduces the net daily income to milk producers from dairying because the 
potential of milk production of animals is not fully exploited. 
 y To balance the ration of animals, NDDB has developed a user-friendly software, which can 
be used by trained and dedicated local resource persons (LRPs) identified for the area.
 y Farmers can download and use “Pashuposhan” app from google play store.
 BENEFITS OF RATION BALANCING PROGRAMME (RBP)
 y Using the locally available feed resources, ration of animals is balanced at a least cost 
 y Increase in milk production with more fat and solids-not-fat 
 y Increase in the net daily income 
 y Improved reproduction efficiency 
 y Reduction in inter-calving period, thereby increase in productive life of animals 
 y Improvement in general health of animals 
 y Improved growth rate in calves, leading to early maturity 
 y Reduction in methane emission, a potent green house gas (GHG)


C. IMPORTANCE OF COMPOUND CATTLE FEED IN MILK PRODUCTION
 y Cattle feed produced by the Milk Unions/Federations is a balanced source of essential 
nutrients required for body maintenance, growth and milk production. 
y It is manufactured using good quality grains, oil cakes/ meals, brans, molasses, common salt, 
minerals and vitamins. 
y It is comparatively cheaper and highly palatable to the animals.
 RECOMMENDATIONS FOR FEEDING CATTLE FEED
 y Cattle feed contains protein, energy, minerals and vitamins required for the growth, 
maintenance and milk production of animals. It is advantageous to feed extra cattle feed to 
pregnant animals for proper development of foetus. 
y It increases reproductive efficiency, milk production as well as fat percentage of milk.
 y Growing animals should be fed 1 to 2 kg of compound cattle feed daily.
 y Milking animals should be fed 2 kg of compound cattle feed for body maintenance and 
additional 400 g to cows and 500 g to buffaloes for every litre of milk produced. 
y In addition to this quantity, 1 kg compound cattle feed and 1 kg good quality oil cake should 
also be given to pregnant animals during the last two months of pregnancy.
 Cattle feed is prepared from 
different grains, cakes, brans, 
molasses, salt, mineral mixture and 
vitamins


 D. IMPORTANCE OF BYPASS PROTEIN FEED
 y Proteins are essential for growth and milk production. 
 y Generally, the major portion of the feed proteins is broken down in the first compartment 
(rumen) of the stomach. 
 y In case of bypass protein feed, significant portion of the protein escapes break down in 
the first compartment and goes to the later part of gastro-intestinal tract resulting into better 
utilisation of proteins in the body. 
 y Bypass protein feed can be prepared using chemically treated protein  meals. 
BENEFITS OF BYPASS PROTEIN FEED
 y More nutritive feed at a cheaper price.
 y The utilisation of the dietary protein increases.
 y It improves growth and milk production.
 y If usual ‘bypass protein feed’ is not available, then 1 Kg ‘treated bypass protein supplement’ 
can be fed (half Kg in the morning and half Kg in the evening) to animals producing 8-10 
litres of milk.
 Bypass protein feed is an economical source of nutrients
 Bypass protein plant Bypass protein


E. IMPORTANCE OF FEEDING MINERAL MIXTURE
 y Minerals are essential for proper metabolic functions. Mineral mixture contains all the essential 
minerals in required quantities. Feeding area specific mineral mixture should be preferred.
 BENEFITS OF FEEDING MINERAL MIXTURE
 y Helps improving growth rate in calves.
 y Better utilization of absorbed nutrients.
 y Increases milk production in animals.
 y Improves reproductive efficiency and reduces inter-calving period.
 y Increases productive life of animals.
 y Improves immunity status.
 y Prevents metabolic diseases like milk fever, ketosis, haematuria etc., which occur around 
calving period

 F. UREA MOLASSES MINERAL BLOCK (UMMB)– A FEED SUPPLEMENT
 y Ruminants have a special compartment in their stomach, which is called rumen. It contains 
large number of beneficial microorganisms, which help in digestion of  fibrous components 
of feed. 
 y During scarcity of green fodder, UMMB helps the rumen microbes to multiply and thus improves 
the digestibility of dry fodder.
 BENEFITS OF UMMB
 Dry fodder supplemented with UMMB can form maintenance ration for cows and buffaloes.
 UMM Blocks Animal licking UMMB
 G. IMPORTANCE OF DRINKING WATER FOR DAIRY ANIMALS
 Water is required for : 
 y Digestion of feed and fodder. 
 y Distribution of absorbed nutrients to various organs. 
 y Excretion of undesirable and toxic elements through urine. 
 y Maintenance of body temperature. 
 y Normally, an adult healthy animal requires 70 to 80 litres of water daily. Since milk contains about 
87% water, for every litre of milk produced, additional 2.5 to 3 litres water is required.
 RECOMMENDATION
 y Animal should have a free access to clean drinking water round the clock.
 y During summer, crossbred cows and buffaloes should be given bath twice daily and at least 100 
litres of water per day to manage heat.
 y Increases dry fodder intake and 
minimizes wastage.
 y Improves the digestive 
efficiency of the animals.
 y Improves milk production and 
fat percentage.
 y It is a good source of essential 

NUTRITIONAL CARE AFTER CALVING
 y Immediately after calving, the cow/buffalo has a low appetite and will not eat as much 
feed as the body may require.
 y Cow/buffalo undergoes a lot of stress while calving, therefore, the animal should be 
given light, palatable, mild laxative ration containing warm rice gruel, boiled rice/wheat 
bran, boiled millet or wheat mixed with edible oil, bypass fat, Jaggery, Soya, Asafoetida, 
Methi, Black Cumin, ginger etc. for 2 to 3 days after calving. This kind of diet is also 
helpful in early expulsion of placenta. 
 y In addition, the animal should be given tender green fodder and fresh water as much as 
it wants to drink, but do not give hot water. 
 y Ensure the milking cow has constant access to clean drinking water and receives required 
quantity of Area Specific Mineral Mixture daily


IMPORTANCE OF GREEN FODDER IN MILK PRODUCTION
 Green fodder is an economic source of nutrients for the dairy animals.  It is highly palatable and 
digestible. Micro-organisms present in green fodder help in improving digestibility of crop 
residues under mixed feeding system. It also helps in maintaining good health and improving 
breeding efficiency of animals. Increased use of green fodder in the ration of animals may 
reduce cost of milk production.
 To reduce the gap between demand and availability of green fodder, there is a need to improve 
green fodder yield through enhanced use of improved fodder seeds. For ensuring year round 
green fodder production, farmers need to adopt following agricultural practices:
 y Always use certified / truthfully labeled seed / planting material of improved high yielding 
varieties of fodder crops.
 y Follow recommended package of practices for fodder cultivation such as land preparation, 
timely sowing, fertilizer application, irrigation, weed and pest control and harvesting schedule.
 y Growing short duration varieties of fodder crops such as maize, sunflower, chinese 
cabbage, turnip, cowpea etc. between two main seasonal crops.
 y Cultivate cereal fodder crops like maize, bajra and sorghum along with fodder legumes like 
cowpea, cluster bean and velvet bean.
 y Cultivation of high yielding multi-cut perennial fodder crop like Hybrid Napier grass in fields and 
also on boundaries of other crop fields.
 y Cultivate guinea grass,  a shade tolerant fodder crop along with forage legumes like  siratro 
/ stylos under mixed cropping between trees rows in orchards.
 y Harvest the multi-cut fodder crops at regular intervals (30 to 45 days) 10 cm height from 
ground level to get optimum production and quality fodder.
 y Cultivate drought tolerant perennial grasses like anjan grass, sewan grass, rhodes grass and fodder 
trees like desi babool, neem, shisam, kanchan, aaradu, khejri, subabul and Gliricidia on fallow 
lands/wastelands/community for grazing. 
y Some photos of important fodder crops and trees are provided in the following pages



B. FODDER CONSERVATION
 Feeding quality roughages to the dairy animals throughout the year is essential to exploit their milk 
production potential. Generally, green fodder is available in plenty in few months like September 
/ October (monsoon season) and February / March (Rabi season) under irrigated conditions while 
its availability is limited during summer months. The surplus green fodder can be conserved in 
the form of hay and silage to ensure supply of roughages during deficit period and to minimize 
wastage of green fodder.
 I. HAY MAKING
 Hay is a sun dried green fodder, containing moisture below 15 per cent. It is a good source of digestible 
dry matter and crude protein for dairy animals during deficit periods. The best quality hay is prepared 
from thin stem cultivated fodder crops like Lucerne, Oats and Sweet Sudan Grass during hot and dry 
summer months from March to May. Some perennial pasture grasses like Guinea grass, Rhodes grass, 
Anjan/Dhaman grass, Blue panic grass are also suitable for hay making.
 To get best quality hay, these crops are cut at 50 per cent flowering stage. After cutting, green foliage 
is evenly spread on dry surface in thin layers of 5 cm thick for sun drying. Every morning after 10 A.M. 
fodder is inverted manually /mechanically for quick and evenly drying. After 4 to 5 days, when moisture 
reaches to less than 15 per cent in the forages, hay is collected and bundles are made for storage. While 
drying, care should be taken that hay retain the leaves and green colour, as it is an indicator of good 
quality hay.
 These bundles of hay should be stored in moisture and dust free places like bunkers/godowns to 
maintain quality for longer period. Hay can be fed @ 5 kg per animal per day with or without chaffing


C. UREA AMMONIA TREATMENT OF CROP RESIDUES
 It is well known that green fodder, cattle feed and dry fodder in combination form the ideal 
nutritional source for maintaining health and milk production of animals. But sometimes due to 
non-availability of green fodder in sufficient quantity and high price of cattle feed pose problems 
for the farmer to meet nutritional demand of milking animals. Generally, paddy, wheat, bajra 
and sorghum straws are available in plenty with the farmers but these straws are deficient in 
nutrients and low in digestibility. Straws have less than 4 per cent protein. Urea treatment of 
straw increases its nutritive value by raising the protein content to about 8 per cent. Feeding 
urea treated straw may reduce the cattle feed requirement up to 30 per cent. 
Straw Treatment Method:
 1. At a time at least 1 ton straw should be treated. We need 40 kg urea and 400 litres of water 
for the treatment of 1 ton straw. 
2. Dissolve 4 kg urea in 40 litres of water. 
3. Spread 100 kg straw on the floor to form 3-4 inch thick layer. 
4. Sprinkle 40 litres of prepared urea solution on the straw using gardener’s sprinkler. Then 
press the straw with feet by walking on it.
 5. Spread another 100 kg of dry straw on top of this compressed straw, and prepare another 
40 litres of urea solution again by dissolving 4 kg urea in 40 litres of water. Sprinkle the 
prepared urea solution over the second layer of straw and repeat the compaction by walking 
on the layer of treated straw. Likewise, repeat the procedure 10 times by spreading 10 layers 
of straw, sprinkling it with 4 % urea solution and then pressing with feet.
 6. Cover the treated straw heap with a new plastic sheet and spread some quantity of mud at 
the point where it touches the ground to prevent the formed ammonia gas to escape. 
7. In case plastic sheet is not available, cover the treated heap with dry straw. Then after putting 
some soil, cover the same with wet clay / or cow dung layer to make it airtight



UREA AMMONIA TREATMENT OF CROP RESIDUES (contd)
 Precautions:
 y Never feed urea or urea solution directly to the animal. Urea as such is fatal to animals.
 y While treating the straw, keep the urea solution away from the reach of animals.
 y Cemented floor is more appropriate for treatment of straw. If the floor is kaccha, use a plastic 
sheet on the floor before spreading the first layer of straw. 
y It is convenient to undertake straw treatment in a closed room or in the corner location.
 y Treated straw should be opened after 21 days in summer and 28 days in winter. Before feeding, 
the straw should be spread in open air for the ammonia gas to escape. 
y Start with feeding small quantities of treated straw. Slowly the animal gets habituated and 
starts relishing it.


HOUSING OF ANIMALS
 Animal housing is also very important in harnessing the maximum potential of the animal. 
Stressful conditions significantly reduces productivity and it is therefore important to protect 
the animal from inclement weather. 
Improper housing also predisposes the animal to hoof conditions.
 The following chapters are included in this section: 
A. 
Animal Housing.
 B. 
C. 
Heat Stress.
 Measuring heat stress through symptoms.
 D. Measuring heat stress through indices. 
E. 
Managing heat stress.


A. ANIMAL HOUSING
 It is important to provide clean and comfortable housing facilities to the dairy animals for their 
proper growth and optimum productivity. The milch animals should be protected from extreme 
weather conditions of summer, winter, scorching direct sunrays and winds by providing proper 
animal sheds. 
During summer, the animals suffer from heat stress and they become restless. Sweating and 
panting, to some extent helps them cool their bodies. Reduced feed intake of the animals results 
into decreased milk production. Therefore, we must have a suitable housing for the animals. 
y Animal shed must ensure minimum 5.5 feet x 10 feet floor space for one cow / buffalo. The 
f
 looring should be of rough concrete finish with 1.5% slope towards drain. The drain should 
be open, 8 inch wide, 3 inch deep having 1.0% cross slope so that the shed remains clean. 
y Height of the ceiling should not be less than 10 feet may it be thatched or of AC Sheets, 
Brick or RCC.
 y Shed should be open from three sides. Only western side should have wall. For every animal 
there should be ventilator of size 3 feet x 1 feet at the ceiling level. During winter remaining 
three open sides may be covered by gunny cloth.
 y 2 feet wide and 1.5 feet deep manger should be located on western wall of the shed. Base 
of the manger may be 1 feet above the floor level. Trough for drinking water should be 
provided by the side of the manger.
 y Eastern side of animal shed should have free loafing area. Animals are more comfortable 
under the shade of the tree. Loafing area, therefore should have 2-3 shady trees e.g. Neem.
 y During summer, sprinkling of water on the animal at an interval of 15 to 20 minutes reduces 
heat stress as evaporation of water causes cooling of body.

B. HEAT STRESS 
Heat stress on animals leads to productivity loss on account of following:
 y Rise in body temperature, reduced feed intake, sweating, panting, increased pulse rate, 
increased peripheral blood flow, reduced growth hormones, high mortality, increased water 
intake, reduced  milk  production & reduced  breeding  efficiency.
 y To  combat  the ill effects of heat stress, NDDB has developed a water misting based Animal 
Cooling System costing Rs 11000 for six animals.


C. MEASURING HEAT STRESS THROUGH SYMPTOMS
 y Assessing the level of heat stress is important to prevent or reduce production losses due to 
heat stress or even prevent mortality in severe cases.
 y Scoring the levels of heat stress by the symptoms (Panting Score) shown by animals would 
give an idea about the condition of the animals. 
Breathing condition
 No panting– normal Difficult to see chest movement
 Slight panting, mouth closed, no drool or foam. Easy to see chest 
movement
 Fast panting, drool or foam present. No open mouth panting
 As for 2 but with occasional open mouth, tongue not extended
 Panting 
Score 
0
 1
 Open mouth + some drooling. Neck extended and head usually up. 3
 As for 3 but with tongue out slightly, occasionally fully extended for 
slight periods + excessive drooling
 Breaths/
 minute
 <40
 40-70
 2
 70-120
 2.5
 3.5
 Open mouth with tongue fully extended for longer periods 
+excessive drooling. Neck extended and head up.
 As for 4, but head held down. Breath from flank. Drooling may 
cease



FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS– ANIMAL HEALTH
 Question: Should we allow animals to be vaccinated if the vaccinator does not bring vaccine in ice box?
 Answer: Never, vaccines get spoiled in ambient temperature and is unable to provide protection to animals.
 Question: Which animals cannot be vaccinated?
 Answer: Sick animals, just calved animals (up to 3-4 weeks after calving) & calves till they attain 3-4 months of age 
should not be vaccinated.
 Question: Can a pregnant animal be vaccinated?
 Answer: Yes, there is no harm in vaccinating a pregnant animal. However, one should avoid vaccinating animals in 
the last month of pregnancy, as the animal as well as the fetus could be injured during restraining.
 Question: Should we vaccinate unaffected animals during FMD outbreak in a village?
 Answer: In an FMD affected village, it is not advisable to vaccinate animals not showing symptoms of FMD since 
it may already be in various stages of incubation even before any symptoms are seen. However, ring vaccination 
starting from 2-3 km away from the infected village and moving inward from periphery to the point of infection 
is very important is limiting the spread of the disease. Strict control on movement of animals, feed, fodder and 
people from infected areas are also equally important in controlling the outbreak.
 Question: Can an animal be vaccinated against several diseases at a time?
 Answer:  Yes, in human beings and dogs, combined vaccines for multiple diseases are already in use for a long 
time. Now combined vaccines against FMD, HS and BQ are available for cattle and buffaloes also.
 Question: What should we do if a rabid dog bites an animal?
 Answer: Wash the wound immediately under running tap water for 5-10 minutes. In absence of a tap, pour clean 
water from a vessel. Clean the wound with ordinary bath soap gently. Apply tincture iodine and take the animal 
to the nearest Veterinary Officer.
 Question: What should we do if a snake bites an animal?
 Answer: Tie a tourniquet 3-4 inches above the site of the bite. Give a small incision at the site with clean blade and 
allow the wound to bleed. Wash the wound with detergent. Call the Veterinarian immediately.
 Question: What should we do to treat tympany/bloat?
 Answer: Feeding of lush green leafy fodder like Berseem, lucerne may result in formation and accumulation of 
gases in the rumen causing distension of rumen. In such cases, don’t allow the animal to sit and do not provide 
water to drink. Give the animal a mixture containing 100 gm of rock salt, 30 gms of asafoetida, 100 ml turpentine 
oil and 500 ml linseed / vegetable oil and then consult a Veterinary officer immediately.
 Question: Is there any harm if we consume milk from a cow suffering from subclinical mastitis?
 Answer: Milk from cows having subclinical mastitis may contain toxins of certain bacteria that are not destroyed 
even by boiling. The toxins may produce diarrhoea or throat infection in humans.
 Question: Is oxytocin injection given for letdown of milk harmful to animal or milk consumers?
 Answer: Use of oxytocin injection is not recommended for milk let down except when used by a veterinarian for 
treating animals for some diseases.
 Question: Should colostrum need to be fed to a new born calf?
 Answer: Colostrum should be fed as early as possible to a new born calf in adequate quantities (minimum 1/10th 
of the body weight).
 Question: Can we deworm pregnant animals?
 Answer: Pregnant animals should be dewormed near the time of calving and again 6-7 weeks after calving after 
consultation with a veterinarian


FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS– ANIMAL NUTRITION
 Question: What is ration balancing?
 Answer: All species require balanced ration for optimal growth, ration balancing is a process to balance the level 
of various nutrients of an animal, from the available resources, to meet its nutrient requirements for maintenance 
and production.
 Question: Can we incorporate gram chuni, wheat bran, banana stem, bamboo leaf etc. and other home grown 
produce while balancing ration?
 Answer: Yes, home grown produce, tree leaves etc. which are normally fed to animals can be incorporated while 
balancing ration. In fact the objective of ration balancing is to produce an optimum quantity of milk at the least cost 
from milch animals by readjusting, wherever required, the proportion of locally available dietary feed ingredients, 
so as to provide adequate amount of proteins, minerals, vitamins as well as energy.
 Question: In case UMB is being offered to the animal for licking, how much quantity of urea treated straw should 
be fed to animal?
 Answer: UMB and urea treated straw both should not be fed to animal at a time. If UMB is not given, we can offer 
urea treated straw to animal to the extent it eats.
 Question: Is cattle feed  required if we feed urea treated straw to the animal?
 Answer: In case animal is neither pregnant nor lactating and is getting sufficient urea treated straw or ordinary 
straw along with UMB lick, cattle feed is not required. But for lactating and pregnant animals, cattle feed/bypass 
protein feed should also be fed along with urea treated straw as per recommendation made earlier in this booklet.
 Question: Do we need to provide extra mineral mixture when we are feeding balanced cattle feed to animals?
 Answer: As balanced cattle feed contains mineral mixture, we can reduce the recommended quantity of mineral 
mixture to 50%.
 Question: What should we do if the animal does not lick urea molasses block?
 Answer: To make the animal habituated to licking UMB, sprinkle flour, bran or cattle feed on the block for few days. 
Animal will start relishing it gradually.
 Question: For how many days does one urea molasses block last?
 Answer: One urea molasses block weighing 3 kg lasts for 5-7 days for one animal
 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS– ANIMAL BREEDING
 Question: Why is improvement of indigenous breeds important? What are important indigenous breeds and 
where are they available?
 Answer: Indigenous breeds are well adapted to our agro-climatic conditions and are resistant to many tropical 
diseases and can survive and produce milk on poor feed and fodder resources. Some of these breeds are well known 
for their high milk and fat production. However, the production potential of these animals has deteriorated over 
a period of time due to lack of selection. The high producing exotic breeds do not have the above characteristics 
and are very difficult to manage in tropical Indian scenario. Hence, indigenous breeds should be improved. Please 
see the inside covers for the various indigenous milch breeds of cattle & buffalo and their native breeding tracts.
 Question: Which is most suitable animal for Dairying – indigenous cattle, crossbred cattle or buffalo?
 Answer: Choice of breed or breed combination primarily depends on resource availability, climatic conditions, 
availability of feed and fodder and healthcare facilities, availability of market for milk, criteria for milk pricing etc. 
In resource poor situations, indigenous cattle and/or buffaloes could be preferred while with moderate to good 
resources crossbred cow could be preferred. Places where fat % is the price criteria, buffaloes may be preferred.

Question: What is an economic animal?
 Answer: Economic animal is one which produces one calf in a year, resistant to diseases; produce maximum milk 
with minimum input cost i.e. minimal per litre milk production cost. 
Question: What is a state breeding policy? Why should it be followed?
 Answer: Every state has defined its own breeding policy based on geographical and climatic conditions of the 
state and distribution of different breeds in the state. Breeding policy is a guideline to indicate what breed and 
breed combination like indigenous, crossbred or exotic breed is most suitable in the given agro climatic condition 
of the state. It should be followed to get the optimum output from your animals and to conserve the native breed 
available in the state.
 Question: What type of semen should be used to breed different type of animals? Whether AI Technician (AIT) 
carries semen doses of all breeds of semen so that I can choose the best option for my animal? What is sire 
directory? Is it available with every AIT?
 Answer: Semen procured only from A and B graded semen stations should be used for breeding purpose . The 
semen used should be in accordance with the breeding policy of the state. The semen doses must be carried in 
cryocan (not in any other container). All AITs may not always carry the semen as per the breeding policy of the 
state hence an aware and progressive farmer should be vigilant and insist to know the breed, exotic blood level 
and pedigree details of the bull, the semen of which is being used to breed his animal. 
Sire directory contains pedigree details of all bulls in the semen station. Ideally it should be available with AI 
technician. If not, the AIT should obtain it from the semen station.
 Question: Is Artificial Insemination (AI) a treatment for infertility/repeat breeding?
 Answer: No, AI is not a treatment for infertility or repeat breeding. It is an artificial method to inseminate an animal 
with semen of disease free High Genetic Merit (HGM) bull. If an animal is not able to conceive through natural 
service due to infertility then it won’t conceive even through artificial insemination.
 Question: Is there any advantage of using more than one dose of semen in one heat?
 Answer: If done at correct time of heat using good quality semen and using correct AI technique following 
Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) one dose of semen is sufficient for successful conception. However, in a few 
cases, if the heat period is extended beyond normal duration; ovulation is also delayed and in such cases, second 
insemination may be required.
 Question: Should I take the animal to a bull after AI?
 Answer: No, the animal should never be taken to a bull after AI.
 Question: What is the ideal success rate of AI? 
Answer: 40% and above.
 Question: Is AI successful in buffaloes?
 Answer: Yes, AI in buffaloes is as successful as in cows. However, proper care should be taken for detection of heat 
and timely insemination of buffaloes for higher conception because buffalo exhibits silent heat wherein animals 
do not exhibit heat symptoms overtly and duration of heat is also reduced.
 Question: Does AI produce only male calves or weak calves or, reduce milk yield of the dam? 
Answer: Analysing large number of observations has revealed that there is no adverse effect of AI on male: female 
ratio, calf birth weight or milk production of dam. These are superstitions or myths which are propagated by vested 
interests without any scientific evidence.
 Question: Which bull semen is most suitable for breeding a non-descript Indian cow to get better milk from its 
progeny?
 Answer: Use of semen from indigenous bulls like Sahiwal/Gir/Red Sindhi etc. is most suitable depending on 
resources or breeding policy of the state. If the farmer has resources to maintain a crossbred animal and the state 
breeding policy permits it, he can use pure HF/Jersey semen for production of a crossbred progeny.


Question: How does milk recording help the farmer in general?
 Answer: Milk recording helps the farmer to get a complete lactation record of his animal. He also gets an idea of 
performance of his animal as compared to the performance of other animal in his herd or village. This information 
helps him to take a decision on managing the animal, whether to retain it, cull it or use it for production of progenies 
for herd replacement.
 Question: Why are different traits such as body conformation, milk components and growth rate being measured?
 Answer: Milk yield is not the sole criteria for judging the performance of the animal. Milk should also be tested for 
other milk components like fat, protein and lactose content as these parameters decide the market price of milk.
 Body confirmation and growth rate are highly and positively correlated to production and reproduction traits. 
Question: Why are my animals being tested for diseases under bull production programmes (PT & PS)?
 Answer: For production of disease free semen, selected bull and its dam should be free from disease because 
certain diseases are spread to other animals through semen.
 Question: What is sexed semen? Where it is available? What is the cost? Is it available with all AITs? How to verify 
whether sexed semen has been used on my animal? Is it available for all breeds and for buffaloes also? What are 
the advantages of using sexed semen over conventional semen? What is the success rate?
 Answer: Such semen in which sperms of a single gender is present and calf of desired gender could be produced 
is called sexed semen. Its purity level is 80-90%, implying that 80-90% of the calves produced through this semen 
will be of same gender. On the other hand, ratio of male and female calves born out of conventional semen is 50:50. 
As of now, no semen station is manufacturing sexed semen, hence it has to be imported from foreign countries, 
but it is now being produced by a few agencies. 
Sexed semen is available at the rate of Rs.1200-2000/- per dose. However it is available at subsidized rate in a few 
States. Please note that sexed semen is not available with all the AITs. 
For import of sexed semen it is necessary to take permission from Animal Husbandry Department. It is also 
mandatory to maintain records of the calf produced through sexed semen. 
It is possible to check the quality of sexed semen. If the animal is inseminated through sexed semen, the farmers 
are requested to keep the straw safely and carefully read the information printed on the straw. From the detains 
written on the straw, the farmer can judge whether his cow has been inseminated with sexed semen or not. 
As of now, sexed semen is available for HF, Jersey, Gir, Sahiwal and Murrah breeds. 
By using sexed semen, calf of desired sex may be obtained. 
As number of sperms present in the sexed semen is less as compared to conventional semen, hence conception 
rate through sexed semen is also less by 10-20%.
 Question: What is embryo transfer (ET)? Is it an alternative to AI to get my cow/buffalo conceived? My cow/buffalo 
is not getting conceived in spite of repeated AI, can I use ET to get it conceived? Who can provide me ET services? 
What is the cost? Can I have a choice of sex of calf through ET?
 Answer: In ET technique, the embryos produced out of elite cow and buffalo is transferred to a recipient animal 
which acts as a surrogate mother and carries the embryo to full term. ET is a technique to increase the reproduction 
rate of genetically superior females – to get more calves in a life time than possible through normal reproduction.
 ET is being carried out by a few organisations in India namely, SAG, Bidaj (Gujarat), PBGSBS, Haringhata (West 
Bengal), PLDB, Chandigarh, (Punjab), ULDB, Dehradun (Uttarakhand) and BAIF, Pune (Maharashtra) to produce 
HGM bulls for semen production. ET services cannot be provided at farmer’s level on individual basis however the 
same may be conform with the above organisations.
 Cost of ET may be estimated through breed of the embryo, its quality, successful conceptions etc.
 Advantages of sexed semen may be taken to determine the sex of calf produce through ET. 
An embryo cannot be transferred using an AI gun and requires specialized skills and transfer equipment. Therefore, 
do not believe if a person claims to have an embryo and proposes to transfer it into your animal. Check his 
antecedents properly